ROUTLEDGE LIBRARY EDITIONS:
          JAPAN


        NIHONGI
This page intentionally left blank
                    NIHONGI
Chronicles of Japan From the Earliest Times to
                   A.D. 697




 Translated from the Original Chinese and Japanese by
                    W. G. ASTON




                       Volume 55




                           Routledge
                           Taylor &. Francis G ro u p

                    L O N D O N A N D N E W YO RK
                            First published in 1896
                     This edition ﬁrst published in 2011
                                by Routledge
          2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
              Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
                               by Routledge
                 270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
  Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
                © 1896 Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co Ltd


  All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
  utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
 known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
                                    publishers.
               British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
     A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

                       ISBN 13: 978-0-415-56498-4 (Set)
                      eISBN 13: 978-0-203-84317-8 (Set)
                   ISBN 13: 978-0-415-59400-4 (Volume 55)
                  eISBN 13: 978-0-203-84195-2 (Volume 55)

                               Publisher’s Note
The publisher has gone to great lengths to ensure the quality of this reprint but
  points out that some imperfections in the original copies may be apparent.

                                Disclaimer
  The publisher has made every eﬀort to trace copyright holders and would
    welcome correspondence from those they have been unable to trace.
       NIHONGI
CHRONICLES OF JAPAN FROM THE EARLIEST TIMES

                   TO A.D.       697




  Translated from the Original Chinese and Japanese
                      by
                 W. G. ASTON
                        C.M.G.




                      LONDON
        GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD
              RUSKIN HOUSE MUSEUM STREET
     First Published as a Supplement to The Transactions
     and Proceedinas of the Japan Socie!Y, London
     ~ Keaan Paul,        Trench, Trubner &... Co ltd
                            in 1896


     Reprinted and published l!f Georse Allen &.. Unwin Ltd
                            in 19S6




                               *

This book is c0eYrisht under the Berne Convention. Apart .from
a1!Y jair dealing for the purposes of private study, research,
criticism or review, as permitted under the Col!Yright Act 1911,
no portion mcy' be reproduced l!f aIy' process without written
permission.      Enquiry should be mqde to the publisher.




              PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
             BY   BRADFORD         &   DICKENS,
                    LONDON, W.C.I.
                          PREFACE.
 THE chief object of preparing    this translation of the standard
 native history of Ancient Japan, known as the iViltong£, was to
 make accessible to European scholars the very considerable
 store of material for the study of mythology, folk-lore, early
 civilization, and manners and customs which it contains. It
 may also prove of interest to those numerous Japanese who are
 acquainted with the English language, and who may have the
<:uriosity to learn in what light their ancient history and
 traditions are viewed by a Western student.
    As only a limited sale of a work of this kind could be ex-
pected, the translator was fortunate in being relieved from
all pecuniary responsibility for its publication by the Japan
Society. His special acknowledgments are due to those mem-
 bers by whose liberality a guarantee fund for this purpose has
been provided.
    It remains for him to express his indebtedness to other
workers, by whose labours in the field of Japanese and Chinese
learning he has freely profited. The writings of Messrs.
Chamberlain and Satow 1 have been placed under frequent con-
tribution, and for the latter part of the work,_ the scholarly
German translation of the Nikongi, by Dr. Florenz, has been of
1he greatest possible assistance. He should also mention the
names of William~ Giles, Parker, Mayers, Gubbins, Hepburn,
Anderson, Legge, and Eitel) whose writings are the indis-

  I   Now Sir Ernest Satow, K.C.M.G., H.M.'s Minister Plenipotentiary to
Japan.
VI                          PREFACE.

pensable companions of all students of Far-Eastern subjects..
Other sources of information are acknowledged in the notes.
   Amongst native Japanese writers the chief authorities have-
been the famous scholars Motoori and Hirata. Their religious
and patriotic prejudices often lead them to take views from
which a European reader is forced to dissent, but no \Vestern
scholar can hope to rival or even to approach their vast eru-
dition, clothed as it is in an easy and graceful style, undisfigured
by pedantry. The translator gladly seizes this opportunity of
expressing the strong admiration which he has long entertained
for them. For the Notes, the Shiika£ edition of the N£hongl
and the Tsusho Commentary have been largely drawn upon..
The references to Chinese literature have been usually taken
from these last-named sources. It is unnecessary to enumerate
more particularly the other native works of reference which
have been utilized. A copious list of them will be found in
Dr. Florenz's Introduction.
   The translator should not omit to express his thanks to Mr..
W. Gowland for the use of the drawings and photographs.
relating to the Imperial Misasagi and sepulchral mounds"from
which a number of the illustrations have been reproduced.
   The vital importance of a good Index is fully recognized..
No pains will be spared to make this part of the work as.
complete and satisfactory as possible.
        CONTENTS OF PART ONE

PR.EFACE                                             page v
INTRODUCTION                                             ix

Book                                Accession B.C.
   I.      ABe ef the Gods Part I                        I

  II.      ABe ef the Gods Part 2                       64
 III.      Jimmu Tenno                660             1°9
 IV.       Suizei Tenno               S 84            13 8
           Annei Tenno                S4 8            14 1
           Itoku Tenno                SIO             14 2
           Kosho Tenno               47)              144-
           Koan Tenno                39 2             14S
           Korei Tenno               29 0             146
           KOBen Tenno                21 4            147
           Kaikwa Tenno               IS7             14 8
 V.        SUjin Tenno                 97              ISO
 VI.       Suinin Tenno                29              165'
                                     A.D.
 VII.      Keiko Tenno                 71             188
           Seimu Tenno                13 1            214-
VIII.      Chiuai Tenno               19 1            21 7
 IX.       JinBo KOBU                 201             224-
  x.       Ojin Tenno                 27 0            25"4
 XI.       Nintoku Tenno              3I I            27 2
 XII.      Richiu Tenno              4 00             3°1
           Hanzei Tenno              4 06             3 10
XIII.      InBio Tenno               41 2             ]12
           Anko Tenno                 4)4-            3 28
XIV.        Yuriaku Tenno            4)7              333
XV.        Seinei Tenno               4 80            373
           Kenzo Tenno                48~             377
            Ninken Tenno              4 88            393
XVI.       Muretsu Tenno             499              399
This page intentionally left blank
                  INTRODUCTION.
  Writing.-The art of writing is one of the numerous ele-
ments of civilization for which Japan is indebted to China.
The date of its first introduction is not definitely known.
There are indications that some acquaintance with the Chinese
written character was possessed by individuals in Japan during
the early centuries of the Christian era, but the first positive
information on the subject belongs to A.D. 405, for which an
erroneous date corresponding to A.D. 285 is given in the Nillongi.
In this year a Corean named Wani or Wangin was appointed
tutor in Chinese to a Japanese Imperial Prince. He was the
first of a succession of teachers from that country whose
instructions paved the way for a revolution in ] apanese
institutions and manners, not less profound and far-reaching
than that produced in our own time by the influence of
European ideas.
   From its geographical position, Corea was the natural inter-
mediary by which China became known to ] apan. In these
early times there was no direct sea communication between the
two last-named countries. Travellers crossed the Strait from
Japan to Corea, and pursued the rest of their journey by the
circuitous overland route. But the Corean national genius
seems to have left no impress of its own on the civilization
which it received from China and handed on to Japan.
Medicine, Buddhism, painting, and the mechanic arts were
transmitted, as far as we can see, without modification, and
there is little trace of any special Corean character in the
knowledge of Chinese literature and science which Coreans
communicated to Japan. They had themselves taken up this
study only thirty years before Wani's departure.!

  1   See a paper on "Writing, Printing, and the Alphabet in Corea," in the
"J.R.A.S.," July, 1895.
x                      INTRODUCTION.

   The newly-acquired Chinese characters were soon put to
practical use. Wani himself is said to have been employed to
keep the accounts of the Treasury. In the reign of Nintoku we
are told that Ki no Tsuno no Sukune committed to writing an
account of the productions of the Corean kingdom of Pekche.
The date given for this in the N£hoflgi is A.D. 353, to which, as
in the case of other events of this period, two cycles or 120
years should probably be added. In the following reign
(Richiu's) "recorders were appointed in the provinces in order
to note down words and events." But from the specimens of
their reports which are preserved in the Nihongi, these officials
do not seem to have contributed much of importance to his-
torical knowledge. Fabulous stories and accounts of mon-
strosities and portents form the staple of their compositions.
It may be inferred, however, that such functionaries were
already in existence at the capital, and indeed we find mention
at this time of hereditary corporations of fumi-bito or scribes,
known as the Achiki Be and Wani Be, the successors of Atogi
and Wani, the Corean scholars who first taught Chinese at the
court of the Mikado.
   History. The Kiujiki.-The first literary efforts of the
Japanese took the direction of history. No doubt the Norito
or rituals of the Shinto religion and some poetical composi-
tions date from an earlier period. But they do not seem to
have been committed to writing. The earliest book of which we
find mention is the KiuJi·ki or KUJ·iki (Chronicle of old matters
of former ages), which was compiled in A.D. 620 under high
official auspices, as indeed were all the historical works which
have come down to us from these ancient times. The writing
of history was, and still is, regarded as pre-eminently a matter
of State concern in all those Eastern countries where Chinese
ideas are predominant. The KiuJieki was entrusted to the
keeping of the Soga House, but on its downfall in 645, a large
portion was destroyed by fire, a part only, described as Kokuki
or national annals, having been saved from the flames.
Whether this work is or is not identical with the K iUJ·iki of
our own day, is a question on which I shall have more to say
afterwards. At present it is sufficient to note that the latter
work contains nothing which is not also to be found in the
 K OJ·£k£ or Nzltongi except a few passages in the mythological
                        INTH.ODUCTION.                          Xl

portion and a list of local governors. The historical part is
almost word for word the same as the Nikongz", which, how-
ever, is very much fuller, and is brought down to a much later
period.
   The Kojiki.-In A.D. 682 a number of Princes and High
Officials were formally conlmissioned by the Emperor Temmu
to prepare a " History of the Emperors and of matters of high
antiquity." Nothing is known of the result of their labours,
but this measure led eventually to the compilation of the KOji'ki,
as we learn from a passage in the Preface to that work. 1 It
was not completed, however, until A.D. 712. The KOJeik£ has
fortunately been preserved to us. If the KiuJoiki is excepted,
as of doubtful authenticity, it is the earliest product of the
Japanese historical muse, and indeed the oldest monument of
Japanese literature. It presents many features of the highest
interest, but it is needless to dwell here on a subject which
has been so thoroughly dealt with by Chamberlain in the
 Introduction to his admirable translation of this work.
   In 714, or two years after the completion of the K Ojioki, the
 Empress Gemmio gave orders for the preparation of a national
history. We hear nothing more of this project, which mayor
may not have served to provide materials for the Nihongi.
   The Nihongi-Date and Authorship.-We now come to
the .l'iihong£ itself. It has no title-page or preface, and our
information as to its date and authorship is derived from other
sources. The Ronin Shiki (commentary on the Nih 0 ngi, of
the period 810-824) informs us that it was completed and laid
before the Empress Gemmio in A.D. 720 by Prince Toneri and
Yasumaro Futo no Ason. In addition to the thirty books
which have come down to us, there was originall:y a book of
genealogies of the Emperors which is no longer extant. The
term used by the Shiki in speaking of its preparation is " selected
afresh," which points obviously to compilation rather than
original composition. An examination of the work itself favours
this view. I t consists of detached passages linked together by
chronological sequence, and some endeavour is visible to shape
the materials into a consistent whole, but the result has a more
or less patchwork appearance, and falls far short of the stan-

                         1   See Cho Ko, p. 90
XII                     INTRODUCTION.

 dard of uniformity of style and method which we are accus-
 tomed to look for in historical compositions.
    Materials for the Nihongi.-The remains of the KZ:uJ-iki
 must have formed a very important element of the authors'
 material. Indeed I lean to the belief that whether the present
 K£uj-ikt is authentic or not, much of the earlier part of the
 N£hongZ: (except the first two books) is practically the composi-
 tion of the illustrious Shotoku Daishi, its reputed author.
 It is recorded that he was a profound student of Buddhism and
 of Chinese classical literature, and internal evidence shows
that the writer of this part of the Nikongi was well versed in
these subjects. The KOJeiki is not directly referred to, and
little use seems to have been made of it_ But it was well known
to the authors. Indeed one of them, Yasumaro, was the very
person who took down the KOJi·ki from the lips of Hiyeda no
Are, a man (or woman) who had a remarkable memory, well
stored with the ancient traditions of the Japanese race. That
no community of style can be traced between the two works is
easily explained by the circllmstance that Yasumaro was in the
first case little more than an amanuensis, and in the second a
compiler. It is possible, too, that his associate, Prince Toneri,
was the guiding spirit of the undertaking, and that Yasumaro
simply carried out his directions.
   The Nihongi contains a few phrases which show that the
Nor£to or Rituals of the Shinto cult were familiar to the authors,
but nothing of importance is drawn from this source_
   Another stock of information which was probably at their
disposal is referred to in the History of the reign of Jito Tenno
(A.D. 694), where it is stated that orders were given to eighteen
of the principal noble Houses to deliver to the Government
their genealogical records. Other historical works, notably a
certain Kana Nih 0 ng£, have been spoken of as in existence
before the date of the Nilzongi, and that there was a copious.
historical or legendary literature accessible to the authors
cannot be doubted. The work itself, as we have it, contains
ample evidence of this in the numerous quotations from other
writings, added, as most Japanese critics think, by the authors
themselves, or, as I prefer to believe, by subsequent scholars
soon after its appearance. These extracts are always referred
to in later times as if they formed part of the Nlltongi, and
                         INTRODUCTION.                          XIII

there can be no harm in accepting them as of equal authority
with it. Some are, no doubt, of still greater antiquity.
   An institution which must have contributed substantially,
though perhaps indirectly, to the collection and conservation
of the materials for the more legendary part of the Nlltongi
was the Katari Be, or hereditary corporation of reciters. Un·
fortunately we know very little about it. Hirata, in his Kosk£.
cho, states, on what authority does not appear, that the Katari
 Be came forward and recited "ancient words" before the
 Emperor at the festival of Ohonihe when he inaugurated his
 reign by sacrifices to the Gods. I t is not probable that their
 services were confined to this occasion.
    Character and Contents of the Nihongi.-The Nihongi
 consists of very heterogeneous elements which by no means all
 answer to our ideas of history. The earlier part furnishes a very
 complete assortment of all the forms of the Untrue of which the
 human mind is capable, whether myth, legend, fable, romance,
 gossip, mere blundering, or downright fiction. The first two
 books are manifestly mythological. They are followed by an
 account of Jimmu's Conquest of Yamato, which has probably
 a basis of truth, though the legendary character obviously
 predominates.
    Most of the meagre details given us of the reigns, of the next
  eight Emperors have a Chinese stamp, and must, I fear, be
  pronounced simply fictitiouS'. N or need this greatly surprise
  us. There are other countries where
               Mortal Olen are ever wont to lie,
            Whene'er they speak of sceptre-bearing kings.

 A portrait gallery in Holyrood Palace illustrates the same
 principle, though in a different way.
   Then we have a series of legendary stories full of miraculous
 incidents, but in which grains of truth may here and there be
 discerned. The value of this early part of the work is enhanced
 by the numerous poems of great antiquity which have been
 incorporated into it, and which have considerable antiquarian
 and philological interest.
    The narrative becomes more and more real as it goes on,
 until about the 5th century we find ourselves in what, without
 too violent a departure from the truth, may be called genuine
                                                            B
XIV                      I l'TRODUCTION •
history, while from the beginning of the 6th century until
A.D. 697, when it is brought to a close, the Nihong£ gives us
what is to every appearance a trustworthy record of events.
 We must still, however, be on our guard against the Chinese
diction and sentiments which are put into the mouths of the
Mikados and their Ministers, and there are some strange stories
of a kind not likely to impose on our credulity. This part of
the Nz'hotlgi is of very great value, comprising as it does a
period of the highest importance in the life of the Jap·anese
nation. I t ,vas at this time that the Japanese adopted
and assimilated the civilization of China, material, moral,
and political, together with the Buddhist religion, thereby
profoundly modifying the entire course of their future history.
   The defects of the N£hongi are due partly to the uncritical
spirit of the age when it was written, but mainly to the circum-
stance that the authors were accomplished scholars deeply
imbued with ideas derived from the classical and historical
literature of ancient China. With exceptions to be noticed
presently, the work is composed in the Chinese language.
This is in itself an obstacle to the faithful representation of
things Japanese. But unfortunately it is not all. Chinese ideas
and traits of Chinese manners and customs are frequently
brought in where they have no business. In the very first para-
graph we have an essay spiced with Chinese philosophical
terms which reads strangely incongruous as a preface to the
native cosmogonic myth. Battle axes are mentioned at a time
when no such weapons were in use by the Japanese, stone
mallets are converted into swords, and we hear continually of
the Temples of the Earth and of Grain, a purely Chinese
 metaphor for the State. No inconsiderable part of the work
consists of speeches and Imperial decrees interlarded with
quotations from Chinese literature, and evidently composed for
the occasion in imitation of Chinese models. In one case the
 authors have gone so far as to attribute to the Emperor Yiiriaku
a dying speech of several pages, which is taken with hardly
any alteration from a history of the Chinese Sui dynasty,
 where it is assigned to an Emperor who died 125 years later.
    But what is far more nlisleading than these naive inventions
is the confirIned habit common to the writers both of the KOJ·iki
 and of the Nihongi, though the latter are the greater offenders, of
                        I ~TH.ODeCTION.                        xv
throwing back, no doubt more or less unconsciously, to more
ancient times the ideas of their own age, when the national
thought and institutions had become deeply modified by Chinese
influences. As Dr. Florenz very justly remarks, "The little
\vhich European inquiry has hitherto been able to teach us of
the real condition of Japan in the most ancient times sho'W's
that the historical representation of this period in the K OJ"iki
and Niltonxi (upon vvhich rest all the later statements of the
Japanese) is most profoundly penetrated by false principles.
The newer relations, partl~y developed from native material,
partly influenced by Chinese culture, are reflected back upon
the oldest without due distinction, and t.he result is a confused
picture in which the critical inquirer can, it is true, frequently
separate what is original from subsequent additions, but must
often let fall his hands in despair." A conspicuous instance of
this is the way in which the Imperial theory of the universal
authority of the Mikados is extended back\vards to a time when
their sway \vas really restricted to the provinces round the
capital and a few other places. It is also exemplified by the
treatment of territorial and official designations in the older
part of the history as if they were already family names, which
they did not become until a later period.
   Chronology.-The KOJ·iki \visely has no cllronology. But
the authors of the f\lihongi, or more probably of some of the
\vorks on \vhich it is based, thought it necessary, in imitation
of their Chinese models, to provide a complete system of dates
extending as far back as the middle of the 7th century B.C.,
and giving the exact years, months, and even days for events
which are supposed to have happened in this remote period.
\Vhen it is remembered that there \vas no official recognition
of the art of writing in Japan until A.D. 4°5, and that the
first mention of calendar-makers belongs to A.D. 553, the
historical value of such chronology may be readily estimated.
After the Christian epoch there may have been some blunder-
ing and unsuccessful endeavours to give the right years, but for
several centuries longer the months and days must have been
simply supplied from the writers' imagination. Even so late
as the beginning of the 5th century the chronology can be shown
to be wrong in several cases b.y no less an interval than 120
 years. i\bundant proofs of its inaccuracy are revealed by a
XVI                     INTRODUCTION.

comparison with the contemporary histories of Corea and China,
and an examination of the l\T£hongi itself yields nlany more.
The impossible lengths attributed to the Emperors' reigns are
a \vell-known example, and some, but by no means all, of the
other evidence to this effect is indicated in the notes to the
present version.
   The first date in the Nihollgi \yhich is corroborated b:y
external evidence is A.D. 461, hut the chronology is not a little
vague for some time longer. Perhaps if \ve take A.D. 500 as the
time when the correctness of the Nilz01Zgi dates begins to be
trustworthy, we shall not be very far \vrong.
   In an essay contributed to a Japanese magazine called Bun, in
1888, Mr. Naka has brought together absolutel:y overwhelming
evidence of the utter inaccuracy in matters of chronology of the
early part of the Ni/longi, and I may be allo\\Ted to refer the
reader to a paper on " Early Japanese Histor)T" read before
the J.A.S. in December, 1887, in \vhich the same thesis is
maintained. Such scholars as Satow, Chamberlain, Bramsen,
Griffis and others have expressed themselves to a similar effect,
and it may be hoped that we have now heard the last of the
thoughtless echoes of old I{aempfer's audacious assertion that
since the time of Jimmu Tenn o, the Japanese have been
" accurate and faithful in \vriting the history of their country
and the lives and reigns of their nl0narchs."
    But enough has been said of the defects of the Nihongi. The
above strictures apply almost exclusively to the earlier half of
 the work, and they must not be allo\ved to blind us to the fact
 that it after all presents a very full and varied picture of the
 civilization, manners and customs, and political, moral, and
 religious ideas of the ancient Japanese. Even the large untrue
 element which it contains is not \vithout its value. Bad
 history may be good mytholog)r or folk-lore, and state-
 Inents the most \vildl)7 at variance ,vith fact often throw a
 useful light on the beliefs or institutions of the age when the}~
 became current.
   Estimation in which the Nihongi was held.-The
importance of the Nzltollgi was at once recognized by the
some\vhat narro\v circle of courtiers and officials for whom
it was intended.     Subsequent history' contains frequent
Jl1ention of its being publicly read and expounded to the
                                I NTROI)UCTION.                             XVII

Mikado's Court, one of these notices belonging to the very next
year after its completion. It thre\v \vholly into the shade its
predecessor the KOJioki and superseded the recitations of the
Katari Be and other similar customs. Another testimony to its
value is the series of commentaries \vhich began to be written
upon it immediately after its appearance. Some of these notes,
known as Shiki or "private notes," have been preserved to us
in a work called Shaku-nihongi, \vritten about the end of the
13th centur~y. They are described as of the periods Yoro,
(714-724), Konin (810-824), and Yengi (9°1-923).
   This high estimation for the Nihongi has lasted until our own
day. Its pre-eminence as a source of knowledge of Japanese
antiquity was never contested until quite recent titnes. Even
Moto6ri 1 acknowledges its value, although his religious and
patriotic prejudices lead him to give a preference to the KOJ"iki,
which is less profoundly tainted by an admixture of Chinese
ideas.
   The Kojiki and the Nihongi.-Both the KOji·k£ and the
Nihongi present to the eye a series of Chinese characters. A
closer examination, ho,vever, reveals a marked difference in the
way in which the}? are used by the respective authors. In the
KOJ"£ki, which ,vas taken do\vn from the mouth of a Japanese
by a man with some tincture of Chinese learning, the Chinese
construction is every no\v and then interrupted or rather helped
out by Japanese words written phonetically, the result being a
very curious style wholly devoid of literary qualities. It is in
fact possible to restore throughout the original Japanese words
used by Hiyeda no Are \vith a fair degree of probability, and
this has actually been done hjP ~fotoori in his great edition of
the work kno\,"n as the K OJ"ikiden. This feature gives the
](Ojoik£ a far greater philological interest than the Niho1/gi. The

  1   Motoori has left a poenl to the follo\ving effect : -
                       In all their fulness
                       Ho\v should \\'e kno\v
                       The days of old,
                       Did the august Yalnato '''riting (the Niho1tgi)
                       Not exist in the \vorld ?
   Hirata says (" Kodo Taii," 10 36), " If \"e put aside the ornan1ents of style
of Chinese fashion, there is none anl0ng all the \vritings in the \vorld so noble
and important as this classic""
XVIII                    I NTRODUCTIO~.
latter is composed almost wholly in the Chinese language, the
chief e*ception being the poems, for which it \vas necessar)T to
use the Chinese characters \vith a phonetic value so as to give
the actual \vords and not simply the sense, as is the case \vhen
they are employed as ideographs. The proper names in both
\\"orks are naturally Japanese.
   i\S a repertory of ancient Japanese myth <;lnd legend, there is
little to choose between the KOJiok£ and Nihong£. The K Ojoikl
is on the \vhole the fuller of the two, and contains legends
\\,~hich the Nihollg£ passes over in silence, but the latter \vork,
as \ve no\v have it, is enriched by variants of the early myths,
the value of \vhich for purposes of comparison will be recog-
nized by scientific inquirers.
   But there can be no comparison betweell the t\VO works
"vhen vie\ved as history". Hiyeda no Are's memory, however
"veIl-stored, could not be expected to compete in fulness and
accuracy \,,,ith the abundant \vritten literature accessible to the
writers of the Nihongi, and an examination of the two works
sho\vs that, in respect to the record of actual events, the latter
is far the more useful authority. It should be remembered, too,
that the Nihong£ is double the size of its predecessor, and that
whereas the J(oJilli practically" comes to an end with the close
of the 5th century, the l.ViholZg£ continues the narrative as
far as the end of the 7th, thus embracing an additional
space of t\\"o hundred years of the highest importance in
the history of Japan.
    Text and Editions.-The class of readers for whom the
 present \vork is intended would be little interested in an account
 of the text of the N£hongi and of its varioQs manuscripts and
 printed editions. In an:y case this subject has been so
 exhaustively treated by Dr. Florenz in his Introduction as to
 render research by other inquirers a superfluous labour.
    A fe\\" ,vords, however, should be said respecting the 5 hitka£
 (or Shz7ge, i.e. collected interpretations) edition, \vhich has been
 taken as the basis of the present version. There are a fe\\T
 departures from it, chiefly \vhere the translator has restored
passages of the "Original Commentary" which the .!:;lziikai
editor has struck out or relegated to his notes.
   The Shi"ikai edition is on the \vhole the most useful one,
being "reII printed, and provided ,,,,ith a copious Chinese conl-
                        I NTRODUCTIO:N.                      XIX

mentar)7. To facilitate reference to it the book and page of
this edition have been noted throughout in the margin of the
present translation.
    The large black type of the Shiikai is the text. The
" Original Commentary" and the quotations from other books
are printed in a smaller type. Both of these are usually
assumed to be part of the Nihong£, and are quoted as such.
They have been included in the present translation, but they
are distinguished from the lvihongi proper by being indented,
or in the case of some very short passages, enclosed in square
 brackets. Still smaller characters are used by the editor for
his notes. In addition to these, small Katakana characters
may be seen at the side of many of the characters of the
original text and commentary. They are frequentl)1 referred
to in the notes of the present version under the description of
the" interlinear Kana" or the" traditional Kana rendering," and
consist of translations into] apanese of the Chinese characters
 alongside of which they stand, or add particles \vhich are
 necessary to complete the sense in a Japanese translation.
These glosses are of considerable but Ullkno\vn antiquity.
They are sometimes useful, especially in giving obsolete vvords
and the pronunciation of proper names, but they cannot be
implicitly relied on. They are often wrong, and still more
 frequently inadequate.
    Spelling.-In transliterating Japanese words, the method
adopted by the Japan Society has been follo\ved pretty closely.
 I t is nearly identical with that which is recommended by the
 Royal Geographical Society, and which may be briefly described
 as-" the vo\vels as in Italian, the consonants as in English."
 There are no silent letters.
     Some inconsistencies will doubtless be observed in the spell-
 ing of proper names, in regard to which the Japanese them-
 selves are often very vague. There is a good d'eal of confusion
 between the hard and soft consonants t and d, ch or slz and)·, It
 and b, and k and g, \vhich it is difficult for a European scholar
 always to avoid.
    The spelling in the case of words of Japanese derivation
 follows the Japanese written language in representing an older
 pronunciation than that now current.
     Corean proper names are spelt after the system described by
xx                     INTRODUCTION.

Sir E. Satow in his "List of Corean Geographical Names."
It is based on the principle of the Royal Geographical Society's
method above-mentioned. But the true pronunciation of these
names is involved in much obscurity, and the rendering
adopted is in many cases merely provisional.
   In spelling Chinese proper names, the ordinary authorities
have been followed. They do not agree very ,veIl among
themselves, but it is hoped that the inconsistencies which have
resllited will not occasion any difficulty to the reader.
                      ABBREVIATIONS.


T.A.S.J.-Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan.
Ch. K.-The translation of the " Kojiki" by Basil Hall Chalnberlain 111
          "T.A.S.J.," Vol. X. Supplement.
J.R.A.S.-Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society.



  N. B. -Attention ]s drawn to the Table of Errata and Addenda in the
second volulne
This page intentionally left blank
                      NIH 0 N G 1.                        1




                                 BOOK I.~
                       TIlE AGE OF THE GODS.

                                   PART     I.
OF old, Heaven and Earth \vere not yet separated, and the In
and Yo 3 not yet divided. They formed a chaotic mass like an
   1 Nihon, otherwise Nippon, the Niphon of our older maps~ \vhere it is

wrongly limited to the main island of Japan. Japan is Inerely a Chinese
pronunciation of this word, Inodified in the mouths of Europeans. Nihon,
in Chinese B ~,lneans sun-origin, i.e. sunrise, The country received
this name froln its position to the east of the ,A.siatic continent. China being
the Great Central I~and, other countries \vere given names \\·ith reference to
it. Corea, for example, is the Tong-Kuk or East-Country. These Chinese
characters are sOlnetimes used to represent Yalnato, the true old Japanese
name of the country, as in the nalne of the first Elnperor, Katnu-yamato-
ihare-biko-hoho-demi, better kno\vn as Jimlnu Tenno. I have little doubt
that Nihon, as a name for Japan, ,ras first used by the Corean scholars who
came over in numbers during the early part of the seventh century. Perhaps
the earliest genuine use of this term occurs in the lament for the death
of Shotoku Daishi by a Corean Buddhist priest in .'-.D. 620.
    In 670 it \vas fonnally notified to one of the Corean kingdoms that this
would be the name of the country in future, and from about the same time
the Chinese also began to use it officially.
    There are several cases of its being used retrospectively in places where it
 has no business, as in a supposed letter (rOln the King of Koryo to the
 Emperor of Japan quoted in the" Kihongi~' under 297 A.D.
    " Nihongi," or the Chronicles of Japan, is the proper and original nalne of
 this \vork. But later editors and \vriters have introduced the syllable sho..
 \vriting, styling it the Nihop-shoki, \\rhich is its nlost usual literary designa-
 tion at the present tilne. I t is also spoken of as the" Shoki."
    ~ The first t\\70 books of the" Nihongi " contain the lnyths which form the
 basis of the Shinto religion. For the further study of this subject, Chamber-
 lain's admirably faithful translation of the Kojiki, and Satow's contributions
 to the" J.A.S.T." will be found indispensable. Griffis's H Religions of Japan"
 may also be consulted \\'ith advantage.
    3 The Yin and Yang, or female and male principles of Chinese philosophy
 See" Mayer's Chinese Manual," p. 293.
 2                                NIHONGI.

egg \vhich \vas of obscurely defined limits and contained
 germs.
   The purer and clearer part was thinly drawn out, and formed
 Heaven, while the heavier and grosser element settled dO\\Tn
and became Earth.
   The finer element easily became a united body, but the
 consolidation of the heavy and gross element was accomplished
with difficulty.
   Heaven was therefore formed first, and Earth was established
subsequently.
   Thereafter Divine Beings were produced between them.!
   Hence 2 it is said that when the world began to be created,
the soil of which lands \vere composed floated about in a manner
which might be compared to the floating of a fish sporting on
the surface of the water.
   At this time a certain thing was produced between Heaven
and Earth. It was in [orin like a reed-shoot. Now this
    1 These opening sentences of the" Nihong-i " have been justly condemned
 by modern Shinto scholars such as Moto\vori and Hirata as an essay of the
 Chinese rationalistic type, which has been a\\1kwardly prefixed to the genuine
 Japanese traditions. Hirata Inentions t\VO Chinese works named     rtt m.:r
 and ~ E 1fJ 8B, as among the originals from \\rhich the author of the
 " Nihongi" borrowed these ideas. See Satow's "Revival of Pure Shinto,"
 pp. 19 and 51 (reprint), "Japan Asiatic Society's Transactions," 1875,
 Appendix. I take this opportunity of referring· the reader to this treatise"
 ,vhich is 11luch the Inost instructive and accurate \vork that has yet appeared
 on the ancient Japanese religion and mythology. No serious student of
 this subject can afford to neglect it.
    The corresponding passage of the" Kiujiki" (vide Index) is as follows :-
 " Of old, the original essence was a chaotic mass. Heaven and Earth had
 not yet been separated, but \vere like an egg, of ill-defined limits and con-
 taining germs. Thereafter, the pure essence, ascending by degrees, becalne
 thinly spread out, and formed Heaven. The floating grosser essence sank
 heavily, and, settling down, became Earth. \Vhat \\Oe call countries ,vere
 produced by the opening, splitting up, and dividing of the earth as it floated
 along. It might be compared to the floating of a fish which sports on the
 surface of the water. N O\V Heaven was produced first, and Earth after-
 wards."
   2 Motowori points out that hence has no meaning here.          It is inserted
 clulnsily to make it appear as if there \\7ere some connection between the
 Chinese essay which precedes and the Japanese tradition \vhich follo\vs.
The author is fond ()f this \\·ord and frequently brings it in \vithout lnuch
"lneaning.
                      "[HE AGE 01·' THE GODS.                                  3
became transforlned into a God, and was called I\.uni·toko- I. 2.1
tachi no Mikoto.~
  [The character     -=
                    is used owing to the extre/11e dignity of this
Deity. For the (Ithers tl,e character 'It -is used. Both are read
Mikoto. This rule isfo/lowed below.:']
  Next there was Kuni no sa-tsuchi no Mikoto,"" and next
Toyo-kumu-nu no Mikoto,i) in all three deities. 6
  1  The marginal references are to the Shukai edition of the original.
  2  Land-eternal-stand-of-august-thing.
   3 This distinction is, of course, an invention of the persons \vho cOlnluitted

the myths to \vriting, and it is by no means consistently adhered to even in
the " Nihongi J'
   The passage in italics is from \vhat is called the "Origin,l1 Conllnentary,"
for which see introduction.
   4 Land-of.right-soil-oLaugustness, i.e. his augustness the true soil of th

land. Sa, \vhich I have rendered "right," is a lnere honorific. Tsuchi is
written \vith a Chinese character which lneans "mallet," but it must be taken
here as put phonetically for tsuchi, land or soil.
   5 Rich-form-plain-of augustness.      The meaning of luany of the names of
the gods is obscure, and these renderings nlust be accepted \\,ith caution.
COlnpare the notes to Chalnberlain's" Kojiki," \\"here rrluch attention has
been given to this subject. It may be relnarked that there is great and
inextricable confusion as to the early deities bet\veen the various ancient
authorities, the "Kojiki," the" Kiujiki," the "Kogojiui," the various docu-
Inents quoted in the " N ihongi," and the " N ihongi " itself.
   6 The Chinese   -= "       Ineans silnply three deities. But the interlinear
Kana has lni-bashira no Kalni, i.e. Deities, three pillars, hashira or
bashira being the usual auxiliary numeral (like our head of cattle, sail of
ships, etc.) for gods In the ancient literature. Historical Shinto has no idols,
but does not this use of the \vord hashira suggest a tilne \vhen the gods of
Japan \vere \vooden posts carved at the top into a rude selnblance of the
human countenance, such as are seen at this day in luany savage lands? In
Corea, closely related to Japan, there are gods of this kind. The mile-posts
there have their upper part fashioned into the shape of an idol, to which SOlne
pOlnpOl1S title is given, and at a village not far from Soul, on the \Vonsan
road, I have seen a group of a dozen or more of these pillar-gods, set up,
I \vas told, as guardidns to the inhabitants during an epidenlic of snlall.pox.
   The word Kalui, deity, has a very \vide application in Japanese. It
Ineans primarily upper, and hence nobles, the sovereign, gods, and generally
any \vonderful or mysterious thing. The leopard and \volf are Kalni, the
peach \\'ith which Izanagi put to flight the thunders \vhich pursued hiln in
the land of YOlni, etc. See Hirata's interesting relnarks translated by
Satow in H Revival of Pure Shinto," " J.A.S. T .," p. 42 (reprint).
   The Aino ideas regarding Kamui are very similar. See Batchelor in
"J.A.S.T.," XVI., Pt. I., p. 17.
    4                                 NIHONGI.

      These were pure males spontaneously developed by the
    operation of the principle of Heaven!
           In one writing it is said :2_" When Heaven and Earth
        began, a thing existed in the midst of the Void. 3 I ts shape
        may not be described. Within it a Deity was sponta-
        neously produced, whose name was Kuni-toko-tachi no
         Mikoto, also called Kuni-soko-tachi 4 no Mikoto. Next
        there was Kuni no sa-tsuchi no Mikoto, also called Kuni
         no sa tachi & no Mikoto. Next there was Toyo-kuni-
         nushi·i no Mikoto, also called Toyo-kumu-nu 7 no Mikoto,
        Toyo-ka-fushi-no 8 no Mikoto, Uki-fu-no-toyo-kahi 9 no
         Mikoto, Toyo-kuni-no III no Mikoto, Toyo-kuhi-no 11 no
         Mikoto, Ha-ko-kuni-no 12 no Mikoto, or Mi-no ,a no
         Mikoto."
            In one \\"riting it is said :-" Of old, when the land was
         young and the earth :young, it floated about, as it were float-
         ing oil. At this time a thing was produced within the land,
         in shape like a reed-shoot when it sprouts forth. From this
         there was a Deity developed, whose name was Umashi.
1.3      ashi-kabi-hiko-ji 4 no Mikoto. NexttherewasKuninotoko-
         tachi no Mikoto, and next Kuni no sa-tsuchi no Mikoto."

        1 The principle of Heaven is the sanle thing as the Yo or male principle

     of Chinese philosophy. This again is no part of the old tradition.
        2 These quotations are usually referred to as part of the "NihongLU

     They were, 10 Iny opinion, added at a sOlne\vhat (but not Inuch) later date.
     They afford S01l1e indication of the nlass of ,vritten literature \\,hich existed
     011 this subject
        a In Japanese sora, to be distinguished from at/Ie or nIna, the heaven or
     finnament, which was regarded as a plain, as in the expression takama no
     hara, the plain of high heaven .
          .. Soko means bottonl.                    ~ Tachi means stand
          f; Rich-country-master.                   1 Rich ·fonn-nl0or.
           h Rich-perfume-joint-plain.             9 Float-pass-plain-rich-buy.

         10 Rich-land-plain.                       11 Rich- bite (?) plain.

        12 Leaf-tree-land-plain.

         13 1\1ino is written \vith characters \vhich suggest the derivation see-plain.

     l~ut mi is tnore probably a honorific, to be rendered" august."
        1.J Svvcet-reed-shoot-princc-elder.    There is some doubt about the precise
     signification of the word.ii here rendered elder. It is the same root which
     \ve have in chichi father; ,vo-ji, uncle; oro-chi, serpent, and tsutsu or tsuchi,
     \vhich is found in Ulan)' llan1CS of gods. I t is probably little Inore than a
     mere honorific.
                     TI-IE AGE OF TIlE GODS.                               5
         In one writing it is said :-" "Then Heaven and Earth
      were in a state of chaos, there was first of all a deity,l
      whose name was Umashi-ashi-kabi-hiko-ji no Mikoto.
      Next there was Kuni-soko-tachi no Mikoto."
         In one writing it is said :-" When Heaven and Earth
      began, there were Deities produced together, whose names
      were, first~ Kuni-no-toko-tachi no Mikoto, and next Kuni
      no sa-tsnchi no Mikoto." It is further stated :-" The
      names of the Gods which were produced in the Plain of
      High Heaven were Ama no mi-naka-nushi 2 no Mikoto,
      next Taka-mi-musubi:i no Mikoto, next Kami-mi-musubi ..
      no Mikoto."
         In one writing it is said :-" Before Heaven and Earth
      were produced, there was something which might be com-
      pared to a cloud floating over the sea. It had no place of
      attachment for its root. In the midst of this a thing was
      generated which resembled a reed-shoot when it is first
      produced in the mud. This became straightway trans-
      formed into human 5 shape and was -called Kuni no tako-
      tachi no Mikoto."
         In one writing it is said :-" When Heaven and Earth
      began, a thing was produced in the midst of the \70id,
      which resembled a reed-shoot. This became changed
      into a God, who was called Ama no toko-tachi Ii no
      Mikoto. There was next Umashi-ashi-kabi-hiko-ji no
      Mikoto." It is further stated :-" There was a thing
      produced in the midst of the Void like floating oil, from


  1   Lit. a Divine man.
  2   Heaven-of.august-centre-master. The Pole-star god, according to
O'Neill. Vide" Night of the Gods," pp. 535,536.
   3 High-august-gro\vth. "Personifications of highly abstract ideas are not
unknown in tnyths of savages. The South Sea islanders have personified
'the very beginning,' and' space.' " Lang's" Myth, Religion, and Ritual,"
Vol. I., p. 196. It is not quite clear whether this is the same as the Musubi
or Musubu no Kami, a god who unites lovers, and to who111 the rags hung
on trees by the roadside are offered.
  4 Divine-august-growth.     This corresponds nearly with the Kojiki myth.
   I) The Chinese character is A, which the interlinear Kana coolly renders

by Kami, deity.
   6 Heaven-of.eternal-stand.
    6                                NIHONGI.

          which a God was developed, called Kuni toko-tachi no
          Mikoto."
        The next Deities who callIe into being were Uhiji-ni 1 no
      Mikoto and Suhiji-ni no Mikoto, also called Uhiji-ne no
I. 4. Mikoto and Suhiji-ne no Mikoto.
        The next Deities which came into being were Oho-to nochi
      no Mikoto and Oho-to mahe no Mikoto.
            One authority says Oho·to no he no Mikoto, otherwise
          called Oho-to-ma-hiko no Mikoto and Oha-to-rna-hime
          no Mikoto. Another says Oho·tomu-chi no Mikoto and
          Oho-tomu-he no IVlikoto. 2
        The next Gods which came into being were Omo-taru no
      Mikoto and Kashiko-ne no Mikoto, also called Aya-kashiko-ne
      no Mikoto, Imi kashiki no Mikoto, or Awo·kashiki·ne no Mikoto,
      or Aya-kashiki no Mikoto. 3
        The next Deities which came into being were Izanagi no
      Mikoto and Izanami no Mikoto. 4
             One writing says :-" These two Deities ,vere the
          children of Awo-kashiki-ne no Mikoto."
             One \\rriting says :-" Kuni no toko-tachi no Mikoto
          produced Arne kagami no Mikoto, Arne kagami nc
           Mikoto produced Arne yorodzu no Mlkoto, Arne yorodzu

       1 The nalnes of these t\\70 Deities are of doubtfllilueaning.    According to
    the Chinese characters Uhiji should luean luud-earth, and Suhiji sand-earth.
    N i or ne is a honorific particle. Vide Chanlberlain's " Kojiki," p. 17.
       :l These nalnes are SOlne","hat obscure.      Oho-to Ineans great door or
    house; nochi, after, and nlahe, before. He, is place; tOlna, a coarse kind of
    luat ; tOlnu, \vealthy; and chi, ground. The other elelnents of these nanles
    have occurred above.
       3 Oluo-taru lueans face-pleasing, and Kashiko, awful.        Ne is a honorific
    suffix; aya, an interjection like our ah! 11ni means avoidance, religious
    abstinence, taboo. Kashiki is probably only another {onn of Kashiko,
    awful. A\vo is green.
       .. Izana is the root of a verb izanafu, to invite; gi, a luasculille, and mi, a
    feminine termination. These t\VO nalnes may therefore be rendered male-
    \\'ho-invites and female-\vho-invites. But it luay be suspected that this is,
    after all, merely a Yolks-etyn1ologie, and that Iza or Isa is shnply the name
    of a place, na being another fornl of no, the genitive particle. I sa is kno'\\'n
    to Japanese myth. We shall find an Isa well in Heaven spoken of
    belo\v. There are t\,,"o places called Isa in Hitachi, and an Isa no Jirja in
     Idzumo.
                      THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                7
     no Mikoto produced Aha-nagi no Mikoto, and Aha nagi
     no Mikoto produced Izanagi no Mikoto.)' 1
  These make eight Deities in all. Being formed by the
mutual action of the Heavenly and Earthly principles, they
were made male and female. 2 From Kuni no toko-tachi no
Mikoto t'J Izanagi no Mikoto and Izanami no Mikoto are called
the seven generations of the age of the Gods. 3

  1 Ame-kagami, heaven-mirror; Ame-yorodzu, heaven-myriad; Aha-nagi,

foam-cahll.
  2 This sentence is obviously from the pen of a student of Chinese

philosophy.
  3 The eight Gods specially worshipped by the jingik\\·an, or Department of
the Shinto Religion in the Yengi period-<)OI-922-\Vere Taka-mi-musubi
no Kami, Kami·mi-musubi no Kami, Tama-tsume musubi no Kalni, Iku
nlusubi no Kami, Taru musubi no Kami, Oho-miya no me no Kami, Mi
Ketsu Kami, and Koto-shiro-nushi no Kami.
  For the sake of comparison the Kiujiki scheme of the generations of early
Deities is herewith added. It will still further exemplify the confusion of
these traditions.
  "Therefore a God ,vas developed in the Plain of High Heaven whose
nanle was Arne - yudzuru - hi - arne no sa- giri kuni-yudzuru-tsuki kuni no
          heaven transfer sun heaven right mist land transfer moon 'lInd of
sa- giri no Mikoto, who was produced alone. After him were born t\VO
r(e Itt Iltist
generations of companion Gods and five generations of mated Deities..
These make up what is called the seven generations of the Gods.

                 GENEALOGY OF THE .A.GE OF THE GODS.
  The Heavenly parent, Anle yudzuru hi arne no sa-giri kuni yudzuru tsuki
kuni no sa-giri no Mikoto.
                              1ST GENERATION.

  COlnpanion-born heavenly Gods.
             Arne no mi-naka-nushi no Mikoto.
           It ea1/etl     Inti/die 11taster
              Umashi • ashi-kabi          hikoji no Mikoto.
               s luee! teed-snoot prince tltler

                              2ND GENERATION.

  Companion-born heavenly Gods.
                   Kuni no toko tachi no Mikoto.
                   land     ete,nal stand
                    Toyo-kuni-nushi no Mikoto.
                         rich land master
                                                                 c
8                                 N Il-IONGI.
         In one \vriting it is said :-" The gods that were pro-
       duced in pairs, male and female, were first of all Uhiji ni
                                   A Branch.
                   Anle • ya - kudari no Mikoto.
                 heavet' eight descend

                                3RD GENERATION.
    Heavenly Gods born as mates.
                          Tsuno • gui         no Mikoto.
                             horn stake (nanle of place ?)
                 Iku - gui no Mikoto, his younger sister of ,,"ife.
                live stake
                                  A Branch.
                         Anle    lui kudari no 1\1 ikoto.
                        heaven three ttescend

                                4TH GENERATION.
    Heavenly Gods born as lnates.
                    Uhiji • ni                   no Mikoto.
                    ",ud earth (honorific affix)
             Suhiji - ni no Mikoto, his younger sister or wife.
             sand eatllt
                                  A Branch.
                            Allla - ahi no M ikoto.
                            heaven meet

                                5TH GENERATION.
    Heavenly Gods born as mates.
                          Oho-tolua·hiko no Mikoto.
                         great lnat prince
            Oho - tOlna - he no MikolO, his younger sister or \viCe.
           great Inat place
                                  A Branch.
                       Allle    ya - \\'0 - hi no Mikoto.
                       heaven ez:ght hundred days

                                6TH GENERATION.

    Heavenly Gods born as mates.
                        4~WO - kashiki ne no Mikoto.
                        greet' awful (honorific)
           i\ya-kashiki ne no Mikoto, his younger sister or wife.
           'lit.' aWJul
                                   A Branch.
                  Alne no ya-so-yorodzu-dalua no Mikoto.
                         eighty lnyriads sjJirits
                    THE AGE OF l'I-IE GODS.                  9
   no Mikoto and Suhiji ni no Mikoto. Next there were
   Tsuno-guhi no Mikoto and Iku-guhi no Mikoto, next



                           7TH (;ENERATION.

Heavenly Gods born as Inates.
                        ILanagi no Mikoto.
           Izananli no Mikoto, his younger sister or wife.

                               A Branch.
                     Taka lui - lllusubi no Mikoto.
                     Izigh august growth

                                 Children.
                   Ama no omohi-ganle: no Mikoto.
                   heaven tholt/[ltt-collzjJriser
                      Alua no futo-dama no Mikoto.
                                big- jewel
                      Alua no woshi - hi no Mikoto.
                              endure sun
                     Ailla no kamu-dachi no M ikoto.
                               god stand
N ext there was-
                      Kalnu mi musubi no Mikoto.
                      abo'l'e growtlt

                                Children.
                AtTIe no nli    ke mochi no Mikoto.
                       a~(ust food hold
                      Anle no nlichi ne no Mikoto.
                               road (honorific)
                     Atne no kami-dalna no Mikoto.
                               ,god jewel
                          Iku-dalna no Mikoto.
                          live jewel
Next there was-
                       Tsu-haya-datna no Mikoto.
                       tort quick jewel

                                 Children.
                    Ichi - chi - dalna no l\1ikoto.
                    Inarket thousand J·ewel
                        Kogoto-da)11a no Mikoto.
                           (?)
   10                                NII-IONGI.

         Omo-taru no Mikoto and I(ashiko-ne no Mikoto, and next
         Izanagi no Mikoto and Izanami no I\fikoto."




                 Izanagi and Izanami on the Floating Bridge of Heaven.


       Izanagi no Mikoto and Izanami no Mikoto stood on the
1. 5 floating bridge of Heaven, andheld counsel together, saying:
    " Is there not a country beneath? "

                            Ama no ko-yane no Mikoto.
                                      child-roof
                            Takechi • nokori no Mikoto.
                            bra'llt milk ,e11znant
      Next there wa~-
                                Furu-daUla no l\likoto.
                                shake Jewel
                                       Children.
                                S.. ki-daula no Mikoto.
                                }irstjewel
                          Alna no \voshi - dachi no Mikoto.
                                   endu1°e stand
        Next there was-
                              Yorodzu.dama no M ikoto.
                              "lJ'riad Jewel
                                       Child.
                            Alna no koha·kaha no Mikoto."
                                    hard river
        A number of these     Deities are stated to be the ancestors of noble
    Japaricse families.   The explanation of the Ineaning of these nanles is often
                      '!'HE 4t\GE OF TI-IE GODS.                               I I


  Thereupon they thrust down the jewel-spear of Heaven,l and
groping about therewith found the ocean. The brine which

very conjectural. Sonle are probably nalnes of places. Possibly some of
the obscurer nanles are Corean. The" Seishiroku" speaks of a Carean
Sagiri no Mikoto, and other kno\\"n Corean Deities \vere \vorshipped in
Japan. The reader will do ,veIl to consult here Sato,,,"s " Japanese Rituals"
in " J.A.S.T.," Vol. VI., Pt. I I., p. 120, \vhere he makes the pregnant sug-
ge~tion that the sun was the earliest among the po\vers of nature to be
de fied, and that the long series of gods \vho precede her in the cosmogony
of the " Kojiki " and " Nihongi." most of \Vh-1111 are ~ho\\'n by their nalnes to
have been mere abstractions, \vere invented to give her a genealogy.
    1 Hirata conjectures that the je\vel-spear (nu-boko or taola-boko) of

 Heaven was in fornl like a \vo-bashira. Wo-bashira means literally 111ale-
                             pillar. This word is usually applied to the end-posts
                             or pillars of a railing or balustrade, no doubt on
                             account of the shape of the top, \\'hich ends in a sort
                             of a ball ~ the uu or tama), supposed to resell1ble the
                             glans. That by \vo-bashira Hirata means a phallus
                             is clear from his quoting- as its equivalent the
                             Chinese expression 3i~, i.e. je\vel-stalk, an
                             ornate ,,·ord for the penis. A Japanese \\'ord for
                             this is wo-hashi, or \vo-bashi, which contains nearly
                             the same etymological elements as ,vo-bashira.
                               A writer quoted in the Tsii-sho con1mentary
                             on the "N ihongi':' says that the Tanla-boko (or
         Wo-bashira.
                             nu-boko) is the root of coition.
     The late Mr. ]. O'Neill, in his" Night of the Gods" (pp. 3 1, 37,67), pro-
 posed the theory that this spear and other spears of nlyth "are but sYlnbols
 of the Earth-axis and its prolongation," an idea which is \,,"orked out with
 Inuch ingenuity and learning in that renlarkable \vork. At p. 88 he argues
 that this vie\\r is not inconsistent with the phallic interpretation.
     There are other indications in the "Nihongi" and" Kojiki " of phallic
 \\rorship in Ancient Japan, altllough, probably owing to the influence of
 Chinese ideas of literary propriety, there are fe\ver than l11ight have been
 expected. ~'Z:de Index-Phallic \vorship.
     All travellers in Japan, especially before the Revolution of 1868, Inust
 have observed numerous evidences of a phallic cult. The Government have
 of recent years done their best to suppress this very gross form of nature
 \vorship, but it still exists in out.of-the-\\'ay places, as has been shown in an
 interesting Essay by Dr. Edlnund Buckley, of the University of Chicago,
 who has collected numerous facts relating to this subject. Dr. Griffis, in
 his" I{eligions of Japan," has also noticed several evidences of it.
     l'ravelling from Utsunonliya to Nikko, in 1871, I found the road lined at
 intervals with groups of phalli, connected, no doubt, with the worshi.p of the
  Sacred Mountain Nan-tai (Jnale-form), \vhich ,vas visited every sumn1er by
12                               NII-IONGI.

dripped from the point of the spear coagulated and became
an island which received the name of Ono-goro-jima. '
   The two Deities thereupon descended and d\velt in this
island. Accordingly they wished to become husband and wife
together, and to produce countries.
   So they made Ono-goro-jima the pillar of the centre of the
land.'
   Now the male deity turning by the left, and the female 3

hundreds of pilgrims of the Inale sex, access to feluales being at that titne
rigorously prohibited.
   A cave at Kanlakura fornlerly contained scores of phalli carved in slone.
   I once \vitnessed a phallic procession in a to\vn some Inites north of Tokio.
A phallus several feet high, and painted a bright vertuilion colour, was
being carried on a sort of a bier by a cro\vd of shouting, laughing coolies
with flushed faces, who zig-zagged along v.,ith sudden rushes froDl one side
of the street to another. It \vas a yeritable Bacchic rout. The Dionysia,
it will be renlelubered, had their phalli. A procession of this kind invaded
the quiet thoroughfares of the Kobe foreign settlement in 1868, nluch to
the alnazement of the European residents.
   That there are domestic shrines in the ]upanars \vhere these objects of
,worship are propitiated by having a slnall lamp kept constantly burning
 before theln is, perhaps, not to be \vondered at.
   Is it a mere coincidence that wo-bashira, Inale pillar, should contain
the element hashira which ~s used as a nUlneral for deities? See above,
P·5·
   Sonle of the Rai-tsui, or thunder-clubs, figured in Kanda's" Ancient Stone
 Implements," Plate V I I., are probably phalli. Their size precludes the
view that they were used as weapons.
   It may be, howe\'er, that both the Earth-axis and the phallic interpreta-
tions of the nu-boko are too subtle. The Hoko may after all be a spear and
nothing Inore, and the nu or jewel Inerely an ornate epithet, as indeed Hirata
suggests.
   1 Spontaneously-congeal-island. Cf. Ch. " Kojiki," p. 19. Identified with a

small island near Ahaji.
   2 The" Kiujiki" mentions a tradition according to which the t\VO gods made
the jewel-spear the central pillar of their house.
   3 The words for male and female are in the original Yo and In. It greatly

excites the indignation of the Motowori and Hirata school to have these
Chinese philosophical terms applied to Japanese deities. I cannot help
thinking that sonle early ll1arriage ceremony is adulnbrated by this
circumatnbulation. Vle have the ceremony of divorce further OD. "fhe
erection of a house is not Inerely for practical reasons. It appears froln
several passages that a special building was a necessary preliminary to the
consummation of a marriage in proper form.
                      TI1E ~A.(;E OF TIlE GODS.                                 12

deity by the right, they went round the pillar of the land
separately. When they met together on one side, the female
deity spoke first and said :-" Ho\\~ delightful! I have met I. 6.
with a lovely youth." The male deity was displeased, and
said :-" I am a man, and by right should have spoken first.
How is it that on the contrary thou, a woman, shouldst have
been the first to speak? Thi:; was unlucky. Let us go
round again." Upon this the two deities went back, and
having met anew, this time the male deity spoke first, and
said :-" Ho,v delightful! I have met a lovely maiden."
   Then he inquired of the female deity, saying :-" In thy body
is there aught formed?" She ans\vered, and said :-" I n my
body there is a place vvhich is the source of femineity." The
male deit)! said :-" In my bodyar;ain there is a place w11ich is
the source of masculinity·. I wish to unite this source-
place of my body to the source-place of thy body." Hereupon
the male and female first became united as husband and
wife.
   Now \vhen the time of ?irth arrived, first of all the island of
Ahaji was reckoned as the placenta, and their minds took no
pleasure in it. Therefore it received the name of Ahaji no
Shima. l
   Next there ,,'as produced the island of Oho-yamato no
Toyo-aki-tsu-shima. ~
   Here and e!sewhe1'e B         *
                             (Nippon) is to be read Yalna'o.:i
   Next they produced the island of Iyo no futa-na/ and next 1.7.
the island of Tsukushi. d Next the islands of Oki and Sarlo


   1 '" The island \vhich ,viII not meet," i.e. is unsatisfactory.  Ahaji may also
be interpreted as "my shalne." The characters \vith which this name is
\vritten in the text mean "foatu-road." Perhaps the true derivation is
"millet-Iand. 7' Cf. Ch. " Kojiki," p. 2 I.
   2 Rich.har,~est (or autumn)-of-island.

   J Yalnato means probably nl0untain-gate.         It is the genuine ancient nalne
for the province \vhich contained Nara and ulanyof the other capitals of
Japan for centuries, and it \'~as also used for the \vhole country. Several of
Mikados called thell1Selves "\ Ilunato-neko. It is Inentioned by the historian
of the Later Han dynasty of China (A.D. 25-220) as the seat of rule in Japan
at that tin1e. (See above, p. I.)
   4 N 0\\' called Shikoku.

   .; N 0\\1 called Kiushiu.
    12                               NIHONGI.

      were born as twins. This is the prototype of the twin-births
      which sometimes take place among mankind.
        Next was born the island of Koshi; then the island of Oho-
      shima, then the island of !(ibi no Ko. 2
        Hence first arose the designation of the Oho-ya-shima 3
      country.
        Then the islands of Tsushima and Iki, with the small islands
      in various parts, were produced by the coagulation of the
      foam of the salt-water.
              It is also stated that they were produced by the coagu-
          lation of the foam of fresh ,vater.
              In one writing it is said :-" The Gods of Heaven
          addressed Izanagi no Mikoto and Izanami no Mikoto, say-
I. 8.     ing: 'There is the country Toyo-ashi-hara-chi-i-wo-aki no
          mid~u-ho.4 Do ye proceed and bring it into order.' They
          then gave them the jewel-spear of Heaven. Hereupon
          the two Gods stood on the floating bridge of Heaven, and
          plunging down the spear, sought for land. Then upon
           stirring the ocean with it, and bringing it up again. the
          brine ,vhich dripped from the spear-point coagulated and
          became an island, which was called Ono-goro-jima. The
          t\\,O gods descerlded, dwelt in this island, and erected there
          an eight-fathom palace. 5 They also set up the pillar
          of Heaven."
              Then the male Deity asked the female Deity, saying :-
          " Is there anything formed in thy body?" She answered
           and said :-" My body has a place completely formed, and
          called the source of femineity." The male god said:-
           " My body again has a place completely formed, and called
           the source of masculinity. I desire to unite my source of

      1 Koshi is not an island.     It cOlllprises the present provinces of Ettchiu,
    Echigo, and Echizen.
        2 These t\VO are not clear.    Kibi is no\v IJingo, Bizen, and Bittchiu. Ko)
    " child or slnall," perhaps refers to the sluall islands of the Inland Sea.
      a Great-eight-island.
      .. •-\bundant-reed-plain, thousand-five-hundred-harvest (or autulnn) fair-
    ears.
      ;, 'The" Kiujiki" Inakes the nu- boko or je\vel-s~ear the central pillar of
    the house which they erected. Elght-fatho111 is silnply a poetical expression
    for large. 'rhere is no special sacredness attached to the nUJnber eight.
                     THE AGE OF THE GOIlS.                                 J5
      masculinity to thy source of femineity." Having thus
      spoken, they prepared to g-o round the pillar of Heaven~
      and made a promise, saying :-" Do thou, my younger
      sister, go round from the left, while I ,viII go round from
      the right." Having done so, they went round separately and
      met, when the female Deity spoke first, and said :-" Ho\v
      pretty! a lovely youth!" The male Deity then ans\vered
      and said :-" How pretty! a lovely maiden!" Finally
      they became husband and wife. Their first child was the




                          The Leech Child as Yehisll.


      leech, whom theystraight\vay placed in a reed-boat and sent
      adrift. 1 Their next "vas the Island of AhaJ·i. This also \vas I , lJ·
      not included in the number of their children. '\Therefore
      they returned up again to Heaven, and fully reported the
      circumstances. Then the Heavenly Gods divined this by
      the greater divination. Upon \vhich they instructed them~
      saying :-" It was b~y reason of the woman's having spoken
      first; ye had best return thither again."         Thereupon
      having divined a time, they ,vent do\\rn. The two deities

   I The leech \vas   identified in after tilnes \vith the {;od Yebisu. Set:
Anderson's Catalogue of Paintings in the J3ritish Museulu, p. 36. Hirata
attenlpts to show that he "vas the sanle as Sukuna- bikona, but is not con-
vincing. The reed boat recalls the Accadian legend of Sargon and his ark
of rushes, the Biblical story of Mases as an infant and many more, for \\'hich
the curious reader may consult the late John O;Neill's " Night of the Gods.'
P·4 IO ,
         16                              NIHONGI.

              accordingl)r went again round the pillar, the male Deity
              from the left, l and the feotale Deity from the right.
              When they met, the male Deity spoke first and said : -
              "How pretty! a lovely maiden!" The female Deity
              next answered and said :-" How pretty! a lovely}90uth ! "
              Thereafter they dV\relt together in tIle same palace and had
              children, whose names were Oho-yamato no Toyo-aki-tsu-
              shima, next the island of Ahaji, next the island of lyo no
              futa-na, next the island of Tsukushi, next the triplet
              islands of Oki, next the island of Sado, next the island of
              Koshi, next the island of Kibi-no-ko. The country was
              accordingly' called the" Great-Eight-Island Country."
                 In one writing it is said :--" The two Deities Izanagi no
              ~likoto and Izanami no Mikoto stood in the midst of the
              mist of Heaven, and said :-' We wish to find a conntr)7.'
              So they tllrust down the jewel-spear of Heaven, and
              groped about till they found the island of Ono-goro.
              Then they drew back the spear and rejoiced, saying : -
              , Good! there is a countr)1 ! ' "
                 In one writing it is said :-" The two Deities Izanagi
              no Mikoto and Izanami no Mikoto sat in the Plain of High
              Heaven, and said :-' There must surel,Y be a country.'
              So with the jewel spear of Heaven they scraped together
              the island of Ono-goro."
                 In one writing it is said :-" The two Deities Izanagi no
              Mikoto and Izanami no Mikoto spoke to one another,
              saying :-' There is something resembling floating oil. In
              the midst of this there is perhaps a country.' So the:y
I. JO.        took the jewel-spear of Heaven and ~roping about fornled
              with it an island which was called Ono~goro.~'
                 In one writing it is said :-" The fenlale Deity spoke
              first and said :-' How pretty! a handsome youth!' Now
              it was considered unlucky that the female Deity· should
              have spoken first. Accordingly they went round again,

           1 Hirata says that as the left is superior to the right, and the Inan to the

         woman, it is proper that the man should go round from the left, and the
         woman from the right. He strongly condemns the Kojiki version of the
         story \vhich reverses this order. The notion of the superiority of the left is
         really Chinese.
                        THE AGE OF TI-IE GODS.                        12

     when the male Deity spoke first and said :-" How
     pretty! a lovely nlaiden !" Postema cupiebant coire, sed
     artis nescii erant. Tum erat motacilla 1 quae ~,dvolavit,
     atque concussit suum caput et suam caudam. Quod cum
     vidissent duo Dei, imitati sunt earn, et in hoc modo
     artem coeundi potiti sunt.
        In one writing it is said :-" The two Deities ",·ere
     united and became husband and wife. First of all, the
     islands of Ahaji and Aha being considered the placenta/l
     they produced the island of Oho-yamato no Toyo-
     aki-tsu-shima, next the island of Iyo, next the island of
     Tsukushi, next, as twins, the islands of Oki and Sado,
     next the island of Koshi, next Oho-shinla, and next
     Kojima."
        In one writing it is said :-" First there was born the
     island of Ahaji, next the island of Oho-yamato no Toyoe
     aki-tsu-shima, next the island of Iyo no futa-na, next the
     island of Oki, next the island of Sado, next the island of
     Tsukushi; next the island of Iki, and next the island of
     Tsushima."
        In one writing it is said :-" The island of Ono-goro
     being considered the placenta, there was born the island
     of Ahaji, next the island of Oho-yamato no Toyo-aki-
     tsu, next the island of Iyo no futa-na, next the island
     of Tsu-kushi, next the island of Kibi no ko, next, as
     twins, the islands of Oki and Sado, and next the island
     of Koshi."
        In one writing it is said :-" The island of Ahaji being
     considered the placenta, there was born the island of
     Oho-yamato Toyo-aki-tsu, next the island of Aha, next
     the island of Iyo no futana, next the triplet islands of
     Oki, next the island of Sado, next the island of Tsukushi,
     next the island of Kibi no ko, and next Oho-shima."
        In one writing it is said :-" The female Deity spoke
     first and said :-' How pretty! a lovely youth!' She

  1 Anglice, wagtail.
  2 The Japanese word for placenta is ye or yena.  Ye is also Japanese for
elder brother.   The Kiujiki has in the corresponding passage }t. or elder
brother.
      18                               NIHONGI.

             forthwith took the hand- of the male Deity, and they at
             length became husband and wife. There was born to
I. I I.      them the island of Ahaji, and next the leech-child."
           They next produced the sea, then the rivers, and then the
        mountains. Then they produced Ku-ku-no-chi, the ancestor
        of the trees, and next the ancestor of herbs, Kaya no hime.'
        Also called Nudztlchi.
           After this Izanagi no Mikoto and Izanami no Mikoto con-
        sulted together, saying :-" We have now produced the Great-
        eight-island country, with the mountains, rivers, herbs, and
        trees. Why should we not produce someone who shall be
        lord of the universe? 2 They then together produced the Sun-
        Goddess, who was called Oho-hiru-me no muchi.!i
                Called in one writing Ama-terasu no Oho kami. 4
                In one writing she is called Ama-terasu-oho-hiru-me no
             Mikoto. D
           The resplendent lustre of this child shone throughout
        all the six quarters. 6 Therefore the two Deities rejoiced, say-
        ing :-" We have ha<l Inany children, but none of them have
        been equal to this wondrous infant. She ought not to be
        kept long in this land, but we ought of our own accord to
        send her at once to Heaven, and entrust to her the affairs of
        Heaven."
           At this time Heaven and Earth were still not far separated,;
        and therefore they sent her up to Heaven by the ladder of
        Heaven.
           They next produced the Moon-god.

        1 Ku-ku is evidently for ki·ki, trees.  Chi is the saIne root ,,;hich \ve have
     in the modern chichi, father, and kaya is the name of a kind of rush used
     for thatching. Nu.dzu-chi, moor-of-father.
        2 Universe.   In the original, tenka, i.e. that which is under Heaven, sub-
     sequently the usual \\Tord for the Empire.
        s Oho-hiru-me no l11uchi. Great-noon-female-of-possessor.
        • Heaven-illumine-of-great-deity.
        5 Heaven-illumine-great-noon-female-o(-augustness.

        6 North, South, East, West, Above, Below.

        '1 "In the beginning the Heaven, Rangi, and the Earth, Papa, ,,'ere the
     father and IDother of all things. In those days the Heaven lay upon the
     Earth, and all was darkness. They had never been separated."
         Maori myth, quoted by Lang, "Custom.and~Myth," p. 45·
                      1"4 lIE AGE OF THE GODS.                                12

        Called in one writing Tsuki-yumi 1 no Mikoto, or TStlki-
      yomi no Mikoto.                                            1. 12.
   His radiance was next to that of the Sun in splendour.
This God was to be the consort of the Sun-Goddess, and to
share in her government. They therefore sent him also to
Heaven.
   Next they produced the leech-child, which even at the age
of three years could not stand upright. They therefore placed
it in the rock-camphor-wood boat of Heaven, and abandoned
it to the winds.
   Their next child was Sosa no wo no Mikoto. z
        Called in one writing Kami Sosa no wo no Mikoto or
      Haya Sosa no wo no Mikoto.~
   This God had a fierce temper and was given to cruel acts.
Moreover he made a practice of continually weeping and
wailing. So he brought many of the people of the land to an
untimely end. Again he caused green mountains to become
withered. Therefore the two Gods, his parents, addressed·
   1 Yumi means bo\v, yomi darkness.        Neither is inappropriate as applied
to the Inoon.
   2 This name is \vritten indifferently Sosa no wo and Susa no WOe          The
accepted derivation refers Susa to Susamu, a verb which means "to be
itnpetuous." Hence the" Impetuous Male" of Chamberlain's and Satow's
translations. I am disposed to prefer a derivation suggested by the 't Idzumo
Fudoki," a very old book, which states :-
   " Village of Susa. Nineteen ri due west of the To\.. . n-house of the district.
KanlU Susa no ,vo no Mikoto said ;-' This is only a slnall country, but it is
a Kuni·dokoro (local capital ?). Therefore Iny name shall not be affixed to
\\'ood or stone.' This \\'as accordingly the place where he allo\\7ed his
august spirit to repose. There ,vere, therefore, established by him the
(;reater Susa rice-lands and the Lesser Susa rice-lands."
    Susa no wo is therefore sinlply the " tnale of Susa." It will be remenlbered
that by one Japanese tradition, Idzulno is the home of the Gods, and that
several of the legends respecting them relate to this locality. It is, however,
probable that the older derivation is really a volks-etymologie, which has
given colour to the stories told of this deity. Idzumo is a chief home of
the \vorship of Susa no wo at the present day.. His \vife's mother was called
Susa no Yatsu-mitni, but it has not occurred to anybody to Inake her an
"ilnpetuous female." Hirata rejects the modern identification of this God
\vith Godzu T enno.
    3 Kami, deity; haya, quick.

   4 The character used is that appropriate to a sovereign addressing his

subjects.
     20                             NII-IONC;I.

      Sosa no wo no Mikoto, saying :-" Thou art exceedingly
      wicked, and it is not meet that thou shouldst reign over the
      world. Certainly thou must depart far away to the Nether..
      Land." 1 So they at length expelled him .
             In one writing it is said :-" Izanagi no Mikoto saId:
          'I wish to procreate the precious child who is to rule the
          world.' lIe therefore took in his left hand a white-copper
          mirror,2 upon which a Deity was produced from it called
          Oho-hiru-me no Mikoto. In his right hand he took a
          white-copper mirror, and forthwith there was produced
1.13.     from it a God who was named Tsuki-yumi no ~Iikoto.
          Again, while turning his head and looking askance, a God
          was produced \vho was named Sosa no wo no Mikoto.
          Now Oho-hirume no Mikoto and Tsuki-yumi no Mikoto
          were both of a bright and beautiful nature, and were
          therefore made to shine down upon Heaven and Earth.
          But Sosa no wo's character \vas to love destruction,
          and he was accordingly sent down to rule the Nether
          Land."
             In one writing it is said :-" After the sun and moon~
          the next child which was born was the leech-child. When
          this child had completed his third year, he was neverthe-
          less still unable to stand upright. The reason why the
          leech-child was born was that in the beginning, when
          Izanagi no lYIikoto and Izanami no Mikoto went round
          the pillar, the female Deity was the first to utter an ex-
          clamation of pleasure, and the law of male and female was
          therefore broken. They next procreated Sosa no wo no
          Mikoto. This God was of a wicked nature, and \\yas
          always fond of wailing and wrath. Many of the people of
          the land died, and the green mountains withered. There-
          fore his parents addressed him, saying: 'Supposing that
          thou wert to rule this country, much destruction of life
          would surely ensue.. Thou must govern the far-distant
           Nether Land.' Their next child was the bird-rock-cam-
          phor-wood boat of Heaven. TIley forthwith took this

      1 N e no kuni, lit. the root-country, by which Hades or Yonli is no doubt
     meant.
      2 See Index-Copper.
                     l'I-IE AGE OF THE GOI)S.                             21

     boat and, placing the leech-child in it, abandoned it to the
     current. Their next child was Kagu tsuchi." 1                I. 14.
        Now Izanami no Mikoto was burnt by Kagu tsuchi, so
     that she died. 2 When she was lying down to die, she
     gave birth to the Earth-Goddess, Hani-yama-hime,3 and
     the Water-Goddess, Midzu-ha-no-me. Upon this Kagu
     tsuchi took to wife Hani-yama-hime, and they had a child
     named Waka-musubi. 4 On the crown of this Deity's head
     were produced the silkworm and the mulberry tree, and in
     her navel the five kinds of grain.·
        In one writing it is said :-" When Izanami no Mikoto
     gave birth to Ho-no-musubi,6 she was burnt by the child,
     and died. 7 When she was about to die, she brought forth
     the Water-Goddess, Midzu-ha-no-me, and the Earth-
     Goddess, Hani-yama-hime. She also brought forth the
     gourd 8 of Heaven."
        In one writing it is said :-" When about to give birth
     to the Fire-God, Ragu tsuchi, Izanami no Mikoto became
     feverish and ill. In consequence she vomited, and the
     vomit became changed into a God, who was called
     Kana-yama-hiko. 9 Next her urine became changed into
     a Goddess, who was called Midzu-ha-no-me. Next her
     excrement was changed into a Goddess, who was called
     Hani-yama-hime.
        In one writing it is said :-" When Izanami no Mikoto
     gave birth to the Fire-God, she wag burnt, and died. She
     was, therefore, buried at the village of Arima in Kumano,
     in the province of Kil. In the time of flowers, the in-
     habitants worship the spirit of this Goddess by offerings of
  1 Kagu tsuchi ,vas the God of Fire.       Tsu is here probably the genitive
particle, and chi the san1e honorific word as appears in several other names
of Gods. He \vas worshipped at Nagusa in Kii.
  2 Lit. ended.                          ;i ClaY-lnountain-lady.

  .. Young·-gro,vth.
  i) Hemp, Inillet, rice, com, pulse.  This is a Chinese {orin of speech, and
with the luention of the silkwonn betrays a recent origin of this tradition.
  6 Fire-growth.                          7 Lit. retired.
  8 The gourd ,vas to hold water to subdue the Fire-God with when he
became yiolent.
  9 Metal-mountain prince.      This legend indicates an acquaintance ,vith
mining.
         22                                N1HONGI.

              flowers. They also worship her with drullls, flutes, flags,
I. IS.        singing and dancing."
                 In one writing it is said :-" Izanagi no Mikoto and
              Izanami no Mikoto, having together procreated the Great-
              eight-island Land, Izanagi no Mikoto said: 'Over the
              country which we have produced there is naught but
              morning mists \\7hich shed a perfume everywhere!' So
              he puffed them away with a breath, which became
              changed into a God, named Shina tohe no Mikoto.           He
              is also called Shina 1 tSll hiko no :rvlikoto. This is the
              God of the Wind. Moreover, the child which they pro-
              created when they were hungry ,vas called Uka no
              mi-tama 2 no l\1ikoto. Again the)i produced the Sea-Gods,
              who were called Wata3 tsu rni no Mikoto, and the Moun-
              tain-Gods, who were called Varna tsu mi, the Gods of the
               River-mouths, '\\Tho were called Haya-aki 4-tsubi no Mikoto,
              the Tree-Gods, \\Tho were called Ku-ku no chi, and the
              Earth-Goddess, who was called Hani-yasu no Kami.              1)


              Thereafter they produced all manner of things whatsoever.
              When the time came for the Fire-God Kagu t~uchi to
1. 16.        be born, his mother Izanami no Mikoto was burnt, and
              suffered change and departed. 6 Then Izanagi no Mikoto
              was wroth, and said: 'Oh, that I should have given my
               beloved younger sister'; in exchange for a single child!

            1 Shina is said to be derh·ed fronl shi, \"ind or breath, and na, a short fonn

         of naga, long. See Chanlberlain's "Kojiki," p. 27. The \vorship of this God
         is frequently referred to in the last t\"O books of the Nihongi. See also
         Sato\v's " Ancient Japanese Rituals," \vhere a prayer to hinl is given. rrohe
         means chief.
            2 Food august-spirit.     The Chinese characters transliterated Uka Inean
         storehouse rice.
            S Wata is an old \vord for sea; l1li is probably" body."

             4 Haya-aki l11eans s\vift-autumn ; tsu, of, and bi (or Ini) perhaps person or

         body.
             5 Clay· easy.                            6 i.e. died.

             1 The ancient Japanese \yord for younger sister ,,'as iITIO, \\'hich is also
         applied to a \"ife. It nlar be doubted \vhether this justifies any adverse
         inference as to the 1110rals of the Japanese in early titnes. " Sister" is used
         as an endearing epithet in the Song of Sololnon \vhere the relation is cer-
         tainly not that of brother and sister. It is true, ho,';ever, that lnarriages ,,'ere
         allo\ved bet\veen brothers and sisters ,,-hen of different 1110thers.
                       THE AGE OF TI-IE GODS.                                      12

      So while he crawled at her head, and crawled at her feet,
      weeping and lamenting, the tears which he shed fell down
      and became a Deity. I t is this Deity who dwells at
      Unewo no Konomoto, and who is called Naki.saha-me I
      no Mikoto. At length he drew the ten·span sword with
      which he was girt, and cut Kagu tsuchi into three pieces,
      each of which became changed into a God. Moreover,
      the blood which dripped from the edge of the sword 2
      became the multitudinous 3 rocks which are in the bed of
      the Easv-River 4 of Heaven. This God was the father of
                ..I


      Futsu-nushi no Kami. Moreover, the blood which dripped
      from the hilt-ring of the sword spurted out and became
      deities, whose names were Mika no Haya-hi a no Kami
      and next Hi no Haya-hi no 6 Kami. This Mika no
      Haya-hi no Kami was the parent of Take-mika-suchi 7 no I. 17.
      Kami."
         Another version is :-" Mika no haya-hi no Mikoto, next
      Hi no haya-hi no Mikoto, and next Take-mika-tsuchi no
      Kami."
         " Moreover, the blood which dripped from the point of
      the sword spurted out and became deities, who were called
      Iha-saku 8 no Karrli, after him N e-saku no Rami, 9 and
      next Iha-tsutsu-wo 10 no Mikoto. This Iha-saku no Kami
      was the father of Fntsu-nushi 1 no Kami."
         One account says :-" Iha-tsutsu-wo no Mikoto, and
      next Iha-tsutsu-me no Mikoto."
         " Moreover, the blood which dripped from the head of the
      sword spurted out and became deities, who were called
       Kura 0 Kami no Kami,12 next Kura-yamatsumi no Kami,t&
      and next Kura-midzu-ha no Kami. '4

  1    Weep-abundant-female.                        : Cf. Ch. " Kojiki," p. 32 •
    3 Literally, five hundred.

    -& i.e. The Milky Way.       Y\lsu, easy, is probably in error for ya-so, eighty,
i.e. manifold, having many reaches.
    i Jar-swift-sun.     So \vritten, but mika is probably a \vord Ineaning very or
luighty.
    6 Fir:e.s\vift.sun.    See Ch. " Kojiki," p. 32 •         7 Brave-jar-father.
    A Rock-splitting-god.         9 Root.splitting.god.      10 Rock-elder-male-god.

   11 Futsu is interpreted as " a snapping sound" ; nushi is master.
  12 Dark-god.          13 Dark-nl0untain-body-god.          14 Dark.\vater-goddess.

                                                                             D
         24                              NIHONGI.

                Thereafter, Izanagi no Mikoto went after Izanami no
1.18.          Mikoto, and entered the land of Yomi. 1 When he reached
              her they conversed together, and Izanami no Mikoto
              said: 'My lord and husband, why is thy coming so late?
              I have already eaten of the cooking..furnace of Yomi. 2
              Nevertheless, I am about to lie down to rest. I pray thee,
              do not thou look on me.' Izanami no Mikoto did not
              give ear to her, but secretly took his many-toothed comb
              and, breaking off its end tooth,:J made of it a torch, and
              looked at her. Putrefying matter had gushed up, and
              maggots swarmed. This is why people at the present day
              avoid using a single light at night, and also avoid throwing
              away a comb 4 at night. Izanagi no Mikoto was greatly
              shocked, and said: 'Nay! I have come unawares to a
              hideous and polluted land.' So he speedily ran away back
              agaIn. Then Izanami no Mikoto was angry, and said:

           1 The original has" yellow springs," a Chinese expression. Yomi or Vorno
        is Hades. It is no doubt connected \vith yo or yoru, night.
           2 This is a feature of Jnany old-w()rld and savage myths.  In the legend
        of the rape of Proserpine by Pluto, as told by Ovid, Jupiter replies to
        Ceres, who denlanded back her daughter-
                       ". . . Repetat Proserpina caelum,
                         IJege tamen certa: si nullos contiget illic
                         Ore cibos."
           But Proserpine already-
                      " PuniCeUlll curva decerpserat arbore pOmU111
                        Sumta que pallenti ,septem de cortice grana
                        Presserat ore suo."
          COlnpare also the story of Nachiketas fronl the Taittiriya Brahnlana, and
        the Katha Upanishad : -
                    "Three nights within his (Yalua's) nlansion stay,
                     But taste not, though a guest, his food."
                                        Muir's Sanskrit texts, Vol. V., p. 32 9.
           The resemblance of the nalne Varna of the Indian -God of the Lo\ver
        World to the Japanese Yorni has been noted, and also some points of
        similarity in the myth of Valni and Varna to that of Izanagi and Izanami.
        See Lang, "Custom and Myth," p. I7I.
          3 End-tooth is in Japanese wo-bashira,     i e. male-pillar, for which see
        above, note to p. I I.
          4 The" Adzu111a Kagami " mentions a superstition that anyone who picks

        up a cOlnb which has been thro\vn away is transformed into another person.
                      TI-IE AGE OF THE GODS.                                12

     , Why didst thou not observe that which I charged thee?
     Now warn I put to shame.' So she sent the eight U gl~y
      Females of Yomi 1 (Shikome, called by SOfne Hisallle) to
     pursue and stay him. Izanagi no Mikoto therefore dre\v
     his sword, and, flourishing it behind him, ran away.
     Then he took his black head-dress and flung it down. I. 19-
     It became changed into grapes, which the Ugly Females
     seeing, took and ate. When they had finished eating
     them, they again pursued Izanagi no Mikoto. Then he
     flung down his many-toothed comb, \vhich forthwith
     became changed into bamboo-shoots. The Ugly Females
     pulled them up and ate them, and when they had done
     eating them, again gave chase. Afterwards, Izanami no
     Mikoto came herself and pursued him. 2 By this tilne
     Izanagi no Mikoto had reached the Even Pass of
      Yomi."
        According to one account, Izanagi no Mikoto made
     water against a large tree, \vhich water at once turned
     into a great river. While the Ugly Females of Yonli were
     preparing to cross this river, Izanagi no Mikoto had
     already reached the Even Pass of Yomi. So he took a
     thousand-men-pull-rock, and having t,locked up the path
     with it, stood face to face with Izanami no Mikoto, and at
      last pronounced the formula of divorce. Upon this,
      Izanami no Mikoto said: " My dear Lord and husband, if
     thou sayest so, I will strangle to death the people of the
     country which thou clost govern, a thousand in one day."
     Then Izanagi no Mikoto replied, saying, "!\1:y beloved
     younger sister, if thou sayest so, I will in one day cause
     to be born fifteen hundred." Then he said, "Come no
     further, and threw down his staff, which was called
     Funado 3 no Kami. Moreover, he threw down his girdle,


  1 The" \Vami6sho " Juentions a statement that these \,"ere used as bogeys
to frighten children with under the nan1e of (:;ogo-me.
   2 The student of folk-lore will at once recognize this pursuit.   Cf. Lang's
"Custoln and Myth," pp. 88 and 92 : "A common incident is the thro\ving-
behind of a comb, which turns into a thicket."
  3 Or Kunado, come-not-place.      Cf. Ch. " Kojiki," p. 39. This ,vas the God
of roads.
          26                                      NIIION(}I.

I. 20.                 \vhich was called Naga-chi-ha 1 no Kami. Moreover, he
                       threw down his upper garment, which was called
                       Wadzurahi 2 no Kami. Moreover, he threV\r down his
                       trowsers, which were called Aki-gui 3 no Kami. More-
                       over, he threw down his shoes, which were called Chi-
                       shiki· no Kami.
                          Some say that the Even Pass of Yomi is not any place
                       in particular, but rneans only the space of time when the
                       breath fails on the approach of death. a
                          Now the rock with which the Even Pass of Yorni was
                       blocked is called- Yorni-do ni fusagaru Oho-kami. 6
                       Another name for it is Chi-gayeshi 7 no Oho-kami.
                          When Izanagi no Mikoto had returned, he was seized
                        with regret, and said, "Having gone to Nay! a hideous
                        and filthy place, it is meet that I should cleanse my body
I   21.                 from its pollutions." He accordingly went to the plain of
                        Ahagi at Tachibana in Wodo in Hiuga of Tsukushi, and
                        purified himself. When at length he was about to wash
                        away the impurities 8 of his body, he lifted up his voice
                        and said, " The upper stream is too rapid and the lower
                        stream is too sluggish, I will wash in the middle stream."
                        The God which was thereby produced was called Ya-so-
                        maga-tsu-bi 9 no Kami, and then to remedy these evils

               1 Long-road-rock.                          2 Disease or trouble.
               3 This might mean open-bite, but the derivation is very doubtful.
             4 Road-spread-out.

              5 l\10toori treats this sug-gestion ,vith supreme contempt.     He prefers to
          accept the identification of the" Kojiki" (Ch. K. p. 39) ,vith a place in Idzumo.
          Other parts of the world also boast entrances to the lower regions. The
          Chinese have one at Teng-chow, and the Roman and Greek legends need
          not be more particularly referred to.
              r, YOlni. gate-block-great-God.

              7 Road-turu-back.
              8 Izanagi's ablutions are typical of the ceren10nial lustration required after

          contact with death. A Chinese traveller to Japan in the early centuries of
          the Christian era noted that" when the funeral is over the whole family go
           into the water and wash." Ovid tnakes Juno undergo lustration after a visit
           to the lower regions, and Dante is washed in Lethe ,\,hen he passes out of
           Purgatory. For lustration as a widespread practice, consult Dr. TyIor's
           ,; Primitive Culture," Vol. II., p. 435, et seqq.
                   9   Eighty-evils-of-body.   Cf: Ch. " Kojiki," p. 41.
                      THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                   12

         there were produced Deities named Kami-nawo-bi no
         Kami, and after him Oho-nawo-hi 1 no Kami.
            Moreover, the Deities which were produced by his
         plunging down and washing in the bottom of the sea
         were called Soko-tsu-wata-tsu-mi ~ no Mikoto and Soko-
         tsutsu-wo no Mikoto. Moreover, when he plunged and
         washed in the mid-tide, there were Gods produced who
         were called N aka 3 tsu wata-dzu-mi no Mikoto, and next
         Naka-tsutsu-wo no Mikoto. 4 Moreover, when he washed
         floating on the surface of the water, Gods were produced,
         who were called Uha-tsu-\\'-ata-dzu-mi no Mikoto and next
         Uhaa-tsutsu-wo no Mikoto. There were in all nine Gods.
         The Gods Soko-tsutsu-wo no Mikoto, Naka-tsutsu-wo no
         Mikoto, and Soko-tsutsu-wo no Mikoto are the three
         great Gods of Suminoye. The Gods Soko-tsu-wata-dzu-
         mi no Mikoto, Naka-tsu-wata-dzu-mi no Mikoto, and
         Uha-tsu-wata-dzu-mi no Mikoto are the Gods worshipped 6
         by the Muraji of Adzumi. i
           Thereafter, a Deity was produced by his washing his

  I   Na\vo is the root of a verb nawosu, to remedy.
     130tto111-sea-of.body.                     3 Middle-sea-god.

   4 Middle-elder-male.                        .> Uba means upper.
   6 As appears from the parallel passage of the " Kojiki," this is a case of

ancestor \vorship, not, it ,vill be observed, of the imnlediate ancestors, as in
China, but of a renlote Inythical ancestor who is a Deity, as his nanlC
indicates.
   7 Adzumi no Muraji is a title corresponding exactly to such English
titles as "Duke of Wellington," Adzului being the name of a place and
 ~uraji a title of honour. It is derived (rOln mura, a village or assemblage,
and ushi, luaster. These titles, called Uji or Kabane, though Kahane is
properly the second or honorary element, were in their origin simply
official designations, and in the " Nihongi " \ve frequently meet with cases
,vhere the office and the title are united in the saine person. They ,vere, ho,v-
ever, hereditary, and by degrees the luere honorary elenlent prevailed. It
too, ultimately vanished, these titles beconling silnply surnalnes to \vhich no
particular distinction \vas attached. Japanese \\'riters, the author of the
" Nihongi" \\rith the rest, have, for ,,'ant of a more appropriate character,
identified thenl with the Chinese    it     or surname, which is only true of a
period later than the time covered by the "Nihongi." There ,vas also a
personal name (na), but the ancient Japanese seeln to have had no
proper surnames, although the Uji ans,vered the saine purpose in a rough
\\'ay.
          28                              NIHONGI.

I . 22.         left eye, ,vhich was called Ama-terasu-no-oho-Kami'.l
                Then he washed his right eye, producin~ thereby a Deity
                who was called Tsuki-yomi no Mikoto. 2 Then he washed
                his nose, producing thereby a God who was called Sasa
                no wo no Mikoto. In all there were three Deities. Then
                Izanagi no Mikoto gave charge to his three children,
                saying, "Do thou, Ama·terasu no Oho~kami, rule the
                plain of High Heav"en: do thou, Tsuki-yomi no Mikoto,
                rule the eight..hundred-fold tides of the ocean plain: do
                thou, Sosa no wo no Mikoto, rule the world." At this
                time, Sosa no wo no Mikoto was already of full age. He
                had, moreover, grown a beard eight spans long. Never-
                theless, he neglected to rule the world, and was always
                weeping, wailing, and fuming with rage. Therefore
                 Izanagi no Mikoto inquired of him, saying, ""Vhy dost
                thou continually weep in this way? '" tIe answered and
                said, "I wish to follow my nlother to the N ether Land,
                and it is simply for that reason that I weep." Then
                 Izanagi no Mikoto was filled with detestation of hirn, and
                 said, " Go, even as thy heart bids thee." So he forthwith
                drove him away.
1.23.               In one writing it is said: "Izanagi no Mikoto drew his
                sword and cut Kagutsuchi into three pieces. One of these


            I The Sun-Goddess.
            2 The Moon-God. Compare \\lith this the Chinese nlyth of P'an-ku:
          " P'an-ku came into being in the Great Waste, his beginning is unknown.
          In dying, he gave birth to the existing material universe. His breath was
          translnuted into the wind and clouds, his voice into thunder, his left eye
          into the sun, and his right into the moon: his four limbs and five extremities
          into the four quarters of the globe and the five great mountains, his blood
          into the rivers, his l11uscles and veins into the strata of the earth, his flesh
          into the soil etc."-Mayer's "Chinese Manual," p. 174. Note here that the
          Japanese myth gives precedence to the left over the right. This is a Chinese
          characteristic. Hirata rejects any identification of the two myths, pointing
          out that the sun is Inasculine in China and feminine in Japan. This is not
          conclusive, Such closely related nations as the English and Germans
          differ as to the sex which they ascribe to the sun, and Lang in his" Myth,
          Ritual, and Religion," points out that among the i\ustralians, different
          tribes of the same race have different vie\\'s of the sex of the sun and
          moon.
                   THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                 12

     became Ikadzuchi no Kami,l one became Oho-yama-tsu-mi 2
     no Kami, and one became Taka-wo-Kami. J Moreover, it
     is said: "When he slew Kagutsuchi, the blood gushed out
     and stained the five hundred ~ ro·:ks which are in the midst
     of the eighty rivers of Heaven, forming thereby Gods who
     were called Iha-saku a no Kami; next N e-saku 6 no Kami's
     child, Iha-tsutsu-wo 7 no Kami; and next, Iha-tsutsu-me
     no Kami's child, Futsu-nushi no Kami."
         In one \vriting it is said: "Izanagi no Mikoto cut I. 24-
      Ka~utsuchi no Mikoto into five pieces, which were each
      changed, and became the five Mountain-Gods. The first
      piece, viz., the head, became Oho-yama-tsu-mi ; 8 the second,
      viz. the trunk, became N aka9 -yama-tsu-mi; the third, viz.
      the hands, became HalU-yama-tsu mi ; the fourth, viz. the
      loins, became l\'lasa-katsu-yama-tsu-mi; II and the fifth,
      viz. the feet, became Shiki 12 -yama-tsu- mi.
         At this time the blood from the wounds spurted out and
      stained the rocks, trees and herbage. This is the reason
      that herbs, trees, and pebbles naturally contain the
      element of fire."
          In one writing it is said: "Izanagi no Mikoto, wishing
      to see his younger sister, went to the temporary burial-
      place. At this time, Izanami no M ikoto being still as she
      was when alive came forth to meet him, and they talked
      together. She spoke to Izanagi no Mikoto and said, , My
      august Lord and husband, I beseech thee not to look at
       me.' When she had done speaking, she suddenly became
       invisible. It was then dark, so Izanagi no ~fikoto lit a
       single light, and looked at her. Izanami no Mikoto was
       then swollen and festering, and eight kinds of Thunder-
       Gods rested on her. Izanagi no Mikoto was shocked, and
       ran away. Then the thunders all arose and pursued him.

 1   The Thunder-God.                    : Great-Inountain-of-person.
 3   High luale-God.
  .. The numbers 500, 80, 8, 180, 10,0::>0 are often put vaguely for a large
number.
  a Rock-split.                            6 Root-split.

  i Rock-elder-lnale.                     H Great-l11ountain-of.person.

   9 ~liddle.                            Ij Spur, '[Jide Ch. K., p. 33.
 11 True-conquer or excel.                l~ Foundation.
3°                                 NIIIONGI.

      Now by the roadside there gre\v a large peach tree, 1 at the
      foot of which Izanagi no Mikoto concealed himself. He
      accordingly took its fruit and flung it to the thunders, upon
      which the thunders all ran away. This was the origin of
      the practice of keeping off evil spirits by means of peaches.
      Then Izanagi flung down his staff, saying: 'The thunders
      may not come beyond this.' It (the staff) was called
      Funado no Kami, and was originally called Kunado no
      Ohoji. 2
         Of the so-called Eight Thunders, that which was on her
      head was called the Great Thunder; that which was on
      her breast was called the Fire-Thunder; that which was
      on her belly was called the Earth-Thunder; that which
      was on her back was called the Young-Thunder; that
      which was on her posteriors was called the Black-Thunder;
      that which \vas on her hand was called the Mountain-
      Thunder; that which was on her foot was called, the
      Moor-Thunder; and th'at which was on her genitals was
      called the Cleaving-Thunder."
         In one ,vriting it is said: "Izanagi no Mikoto follo\ved
      after Izanami no Mikoto, and, arriving at the place where
      she was, spoke to her and said: 'I have come because I
      sorrowed for thee.' She answered and said, 'We are
      relations. 3 Do not thou look upon me.' Izanagi no
      Mikoto would not obey, but continued to look on her.
      Wherefore Izanami no Mikoto was ashamed and angry,
      and said, 'Thou hast seen my nakedness. Now I will in
      turn see thine.' Then Izanagi no Mikoto was ashamed,
      and prepared to depart. He did not, however, merely go
      away in silence, but said solenlnly, • OUf relationship is
      severed.'" Again he said, ' I will not submit to be beaten

   1 Chinese legend also ascribes Inagical properties to the peach.       Si Wang
Mu, a fabulous being of the feluale sex, possessed a peach tree ,,·hose fruit
conferred the gift of ilnluortality. I t has also the virtue of driving otT the
denlons of disease. Staves and bows of peach-tree ,vood were used in the
ceremony of oni.yarahi (sending a\vay delllons), performed on the last day
of the year.
  2 COllle-not-place-great-elder (or ancestor).

  :1 Relations.     The intellinear kana has tll.:-ara, i.e. the same uji or house.
  -1 l't 0111 the" Kil1jiki" it \vould appear that this was the formula of divorce.
                    TIlE AC;E OF TI-IE GODS.                                31
    by a relation.' 1 And the God of the Spittle ~ which he
    thereupon spat out was called Haya-tama no wo.:i Next
    the God of his purification was called Yomo-tsu-koto-saka
    no wo; 4 two gods in all. And when he came to contend
    with his younger sister at the Even Pass of Yorni, Izanagi
    no Mikoto said, 'It was weak of nle at first to sorrow
    and mourn on account of a relation.'
        Then said the Road-wardens of Yorni, 'We have a
    message for thee, as follows: 'I and thou have produced
    countries. Why should we seek to produce more? I
    shall stay in this land, and will not depart along with thee.'
     At this time Kukurii-hime no Kami said something \\,hich
     Izanagi no Mikoto heard and approved, and she then
     vanished away.
        But, having visited in person the Land of Yomi, he had I. 26.
     brought on himself ill-luck. In order, therefore, to wash
     away the defilement, he visited the Aha gate 6 and the
     Haya-sufu-na 1 gate. But the tide in these two gates was
     exceeding strong. So he returned and took his way
     towards Wodo 8 in Tachibana. There he did his ablu-
     tions. At this time, entering the water, he blew out and
     produced Iha-tsu-tsu9 no Mikoto; coming out of the water,
     he blew forth and produced Oho-nawo-bi 10 no I(ami.
     Entering a second time, he blew out and produced Soko-
      tsutsu 11 no Mikoto ; coming out he blew forth and produced
      Oho-aya-tsu-bi 12 no Rami. Entering again, he blew forth


  1 Referring to the threat of slaying 1000 people in one day, and the

counter-threat of making 1500 children to be born in one day.
   2 A Japanese authority says that at the present time spitling is essential

in the purification ceremony. Another says, " This is the reason \vhy at the
present day people spit \vhen they see anything impure." Cf. Tylor's
" Primitive Culture," Vol. I., p. 1°3; Vol. I I., p. 44 I.
   3 Quick-jewel-lnale.                        4 'lorni-of-thing-divide-lualc.

    i Hirata derives this from kiki. hear, and iri, enter", the meaning be ng

that of mediation.
   6 N 0\\" kno\\tn as the N aruto passage, a strait fa~nous for its rapid tides.

   i Quick suck-nalue.     In the Hungo Channel.
   8 Little-gate.                                 I   Rock-of-elder.
  )0 Great-reluedy-person.                         l. I30ttolll-elder.
  12 Great-pattern"of-person
           32                            N:IHONGI.

                 and produced Aka-tsutsu 1 no Mikoto, and coming out he
                 blew out and produced the various deities of Heaven and
                 Earth, and of the Sea-plain."
                    In one writing it is said :-" Izanagi no Mikoto charged
                 his three children, saying, ' Do thou, Ama-teraSll no Oho-
                 kami, rule over the plain of High Heaven; do thou,
                 Tsuki-yomi no Mikoto, be associated with her in the
                 charge of Heavenly matters; do thou, Sosa no wo no
                 Mikoto, govern the plain of Ocean.'
                   Now when Ama-terasu no Oho-kami was already in
                 Heaven, she said :-' I hear that in the Central country
                of reed-plains there is the Deity Uke-mochi no Kami. 2 Do
                thou, Tsuki-yomi no Mikoto, go and wait upon her.' Tsuki-
                yomi no Mikoto, on receiving this command, descended
                and went to the place where Uke-mochi no Rami was.
                Thereupon Uke-mochi no Kami turned her head towards
                the land, and forthwith from her mouth there came boiled
                rice: she faced the sea, and again there came from her
I · 27·         mouth things broad of fin and things narrow of fin. She
                faced the mountains and again there came from her mouth
                things rough of hair and things soft of hair. These things
                were all prepar~d and set out on one hundred tables for
                his entertainment. Then Tsuki-yomi no Mikoto became
                flushed with anger, and said :-' Filthy! N3.sty! That
                thou shouldst dare to feed me with things disgorged
                from thy mouth.' So he drew his sword and slew her,
                and then returned and made his report, relating all the
                circumstances.      Upan this Ama-terasu no Oho-kami
                was exceedingly angry, and said :-' Thou art a wicked
                Deity. I must not see thee face to face.' So they were
                separated by one day and one night, and dwelt apart.
                   After this Ama-terasu no Oho-kami sent a second time
                Ame-kuma-bito 3 to go and see her. At this time Uke-
                mochi no Kami was truly dead already. But on the crown
                of her head there had been produced the ox and the horse;

            1Red-elder.                   2 The Goddess of food.
            3Written "Heaven-hear-man.;' The real ll1eaning is supposed to be
          Heaven-cloud (kunlo)-man, the clouds being regarded as messengers of the
          Gods.
                    THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                    33
     on the top of her forehead there had been produced
     millet; over her eyebro\vs there had been produced the silk-
     worm; within her eyes there had been produced panic; in
      her belly there had been produced rice; in her genitals there
      had been produced wheat, large beans 1 and small beans. 2
        Ame-kuma- bito carried all these things and delivered them
      to Ama-teraSll no Oho-kami, who was rejoiced, and said:-
      , These are the things \\thich the race of visible 3 men will
      eat and live.' So she made the millet, the panic, the 1. 28.
      wheat, and the beans the seed for the dry fields, and the
      rice she made the seed for the water-fields. Therefore she
      appointed a Mura-gimi' of Heaven, and forthwith sowed
      for the first time the rice seed in the narrow fields and in
      the long fields of Heaven. That autumn, drooping ears
      bent down, eight span long, and were exceedingly pleasant
      to look on.
          Moreover she took the silkworms in her mouth, and
      succeeded in reeling thread from them. From this began
      the art of silkworm rearing." ~
   U pan this Sosa no wo no Mikoto made petition, saying:-
" I \\-Till now obey thy instructions and proceed to the Nether
Land. Therefore I wish for a short time to go to the Plain of
High Heaven and meet with my elder sister, after which I will
go away for ever."      Permission was granted him, and he there-
fore ascended to Heaven.
   After this, Izanagi no Mikoto, his divine task having been

  1 Soja hispida. Hepburn.
  2 Phaseolus radiatus. Hepburn. C0111pare with this the Chinese myth of
P'an-ku quoted above. There are Indian and Iranian myths of a si111ilar
character. See" T.R.A.S.," Jan., 1895, p. 202. "Creation frotn the frag-
ments of a fabulous anthropolnorphic being is comU10n to Chaldceans,
Iroquois, Egyptians, Greeks, Tinnehs, Mangaians, and Aryan Indians."
Lang, " Myth, Religion, Ritual,'= I. 246.
  3 As opposed to the unseen gods.           • \'illage-chief.
  3 The" Kojiki " makes Susa no wo to slay Uke.. mochi no Mikoto, but the
" Kiujiki " agrees with the version just given, which is 1110re likely to be the
original form of the story, as it is an explanation of the reason \vhy the sun
and 11100n are not seen together, and has parallels in myths of other
countries. Ama-terasu no Oho-kan1i (no\v called Ten-sh5-dai-jin) and
Ukenl0chi no Kanli are the two principal Deities \vorshipped at Ise. See
Sato\v's "Handbook of Japan," pp. 175, 176.
      34                               NIHONGI.

       accomplished, and his spirit-career about to suffer a change,
        built himself an abode of gloom in the island of Ahaji, where he
        dwelt for ever in silence and concealment.
                Another account says :-" Izanagi no Mikoto, his task
             having been accomplished, and his power great, ascended
             to Heaven and made report of his mission. There he dwelt
I. 29·       in the smaller palace of the Sun." (By s1nallerpalace is 1neant
             the palace of a prince.)
          Now at first when Sosa no wo no Mikoto went up to Heaven,
       by reason of the fierceness of his divine nature there was a
       commotion in the sea, and the hills and mountains groaned
       aloud. Ama-terasu no Oho-kami, knowing the violence and
       wickedness of this Deity, wa.s startled and changed countenance,
       when she heard the manner of his coming. She said (to her-
       self) :-" Is my younger brother coming with good intentions?
       I think it must be his purpose to rob me of my kingdom. By
       the charge which our parents gave to their children, each of us
       has his own allotted limits. Why, therefore, does he reject the
       kingdom to which he should proceed, and make bold to come
       spying here?" So she bound up her hair into knots 1 and tied
       up her skirts into the form of trowsers. Then she took an
I. 30. august string of five hundred Yasaka 2 jewels, which she
       entwined around her hair and wrists. Moreover, on her back she
       slung a thousand-arrow quiver and a five-hundred-arrow quiver.
       On her lower arm she drew a dread loud-sounding elbow-pad. 3
       Brandishing her bow end upwards,· she firmly grasped her

        1  In male fashion.
        2  This ,vord has given lnuch difficulty to the C01111nentators. It is written
      with characters which mean" eight feet," and this is accepted by some as
      the true derivation. Hirata makes it ya, very, sa, a honorific, and aka, bright.
      Perhaps the best interpretation is simply that which makes it the name of
      the place where the jewels, or rather beads, \\?ere tnade. Ya-saka ,vould then
      mean eight-slopes. A place of this nalne is mentioned more than once in
      the" Nihongi." See eh. "Kojiki," p. 46, and Satow's " Rituals."
         3 In Japanese, tomo. This was partly for the protection of the arm against
      the recoil of the bow-string, and partly in order to produce a terrifying
      sound when struck by it. Its shape Hike a comma) is familiar to us from
      the well-known tomoye, the symbol so constantly met ,,'ith in Japanese art,
      in which two or three tomo are joined together. There it represents the in
      and yo, or the in, yo and taiki.
        • In the position for shootin;r.
                     THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                35
sword-hilt, and stamping on the hard earth of the courtyard,
sank her thighs into it as if it had been foam-snow,! and kicked
it in all directions. Having thus put forth her dread manly
valour, she uttered a mighty cry of defiance, and questioned
him in a straightforward manner. Sosa no wo no Mikoto
answered and said :-" From the beginning -my heart has no
been black. But as in obedience to the stern behest of our
parents, I am about to proceed for ever to the Nether Land,
how could I bear to depart without having seen face to face
thee my elder sister? It is for this reason that I have
traversed on foot the clouds and mists and have come hither r. 31.
from afar. I am surprised that my elder sister should, on
the contrary, put on so stern a countenance."
   Then Ama-terasu no Oho-kami again asked him, saying:-
" If this be so, how wilt thou make evident the redness of thy
heart? ,,~ He answered and said :-" Let us, I pray thee, make
an oath together. While bound by this oath, we shall surely
produce children. If the children which I produce are females,
then it may be taken that I have an impure heart. But if the
children are males, then it must be considered that my heart is
pure."
   Upan this Ama-terasu no Oho-kami asked for Sosa no wo no
Mikoto's ten-span sword, which she broke into three pieces,
and rinsed in the true-well of Heaven. Then chewing them
with a crunching noise, she blew them away, and from the
true-mist of her breath Gods were born. The first was named
Ta-gori-bime, the next Tagi-tsu-bime, and the next Ichiki-
shima-bime,3 three daughters in all.
   After this Sosa no wo no Mikoto begged from Ama-teraSll no
Oho-kami the august string of 500 Yasaka jewels which was
entwined in her hair and round her wrists, and rinsed it in the
true-well of Heaven. Then chewing it with a crunching noise,
he blew it away, and from the true-mist of his breath there
were Gods produced. The first was called Masa-ya-a-katsu-


  1  i.e. sno\v of as little consistence as foam.
  2  i. e. The purity of thine intentions.
   3 The first t\\~O of these three names are of doubtful meaning. The third
is the name of a sacred island in the Inland Sea, near Hiroshima, better
kno,vn as Miya-jima. Cf. Ch. K., p. 48.
      12                               NIHONC;I.

       j<achi-hayabi-ama no oshi-ho-mimi no Mikoto,t and the next
       Ama no ho-hi no i\1ikoto. 2 This is the ancestor of the Idzumo
I. 32. no Omi, and of the Hashi no Muraji. 3 The next was Ama-tsu
       hiko-ne no Mikoto. 4 He was the ancestor of the Ohoshi-
        kafuchi no Atahe, and of the Yamashiro no Atahe. 5 The next
        was Iku-tsu-hiko·ne no }tlikoto,6 and the next Kumano no
        kusu-bi; no Mikoto-in all five males. 8
          Then Ama-terasu no Oho-kami said :-" Their seed was in
       the beginning the august necklace of 500 Yasaka jewels which
       belonged to me. Therefore these five male Deities are all my
       chilciren." So she took these children and brought them up.
        Moreover she said :-" The ten-span sword belonged to thee,
       Sosa no wo no Mikoto. Therefore these three female Deities
       are all thy children." So she delivered them to Sosa no wo no
I. 33. Mikoto. These are the deities which are worshipped by the
       Munagata no Kimi of Tsukushi.
               In one writing it is said :_'C The Sun-Goddess, aware
            from the beginning of the fierce and relentless purpose of
            Sosa no wo no Mikoto, said (to herself) when he ascended:
            'The coming of my younger brother is not for a good
            object. He surely means to rob me of my Plain of Heaven.'
            So she made manly warlike preparation, girding upon her
            a ten-span sword, a nine-span sword, and an eight-span
            sword. Moreover, on her back she slung a quiver, and on
            her fore-arm drew a dread loud-sounding elbow-pad. In

          Truly- I -conquer-conquer-swiftness -heaven· of-great-great-august-person.
     Cf. ChI K., p. 48. I take mimi to be con1posed of mi the honorific, and mi,
     body, person, \\'hich is also the ternlination of abstract nouns, as fukami,
     depth, and in this meaning frequently becolnes bi, as in several nanles of
     Deities.
       ~ Heaven-great-sun?
       :J Idzumo no Omi. Omi is a title of rank, probably derived {raIn 0, for aha,
     great, and mi, person. The Chinese character \\-ith ,vhich it is written
     n1eans minister or vassal. Hashi no Muraji. Muraji is explained above,
     p. 27- Hashi, ,vhich is also read Hanishi, Rase, or Haji, means clay-\vorker.
     ~~Ol the origin of this title see belo\v, reign of Suinin, 32nd year.
        4 Heaven prince-honorific particle.

        5 Atahe is a title of nobility, like On1i, Muraji, etc., but lo\ver.

       6 Live-of-prince-honorific particle.        '; N arne of place-of-wondrous-ness.
       ~ These five, with the three fen1ale children mentioned above, are no\v
     \vorshipped under the name of Hachi-o-ji, or the Eight }Jrinces.
                  THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                 37
  her hand she took a bow and arrow, and going forth to
  meet him in person, stood on her defence. Then Sosa no
  wo no Mikoto declared to her, saying :-' From the be-
  ginning I have had no evil intentions. All that I wished
  was to see thee, my elder sister, face to face. It is only
  for a brief space that I have come.' Thereupon the Sun-
  Goddess, standing opposite to Sosa no wo no Mikoto,
  swore an oath, saying :-' If thy heart is pure, and thou
  hast no purpose of relentless robbery, the children born to
  thee will surely be males.' When she had finished speak-
  ing, she ate first the ten-span sword which she had girded
  on, and produced a child which was called Oki-tsu-shima-
  bime. 1 Moreover she ate the nine-span sword, and pro-
  duced a child which was called Tagi-tsu-hime. Moreover
  she ate the eight-span sword, and produced a child which
  was called Tagori-hime-in all three female Deities. After
  this Sosa no wo no Mikoto took the august five-hundred I 34·
  string of jewels which hung upon his neck, and having
  rinsed them in the N una 2 well of Heaven, another name
  for which is the true-well of Isa, and ate them. So he
  produced a child, which was called Masa-ya-a-katsu-kachi-
  haya-bi-ame no oshi-ho-ne no Mikoto. Next he produced
  Ama-tsu-hiko-ne no Mikoto, next Iku-tsu-hiko-ne no
   Mikoto, next Ama no ho-hi no Mikoto, and next Rumano
  no oshi homi no Mikoto-in all five male Deities. There-
  fore as Sosa no wo no Mikoto had thus acquired proof of
  his victory, the Sun-Goddess learnt exactly that his inten-
  tions were wholly free from guilt. The three female
  Deities which the Sun-Goddess had produced were accord-
  ingly sent down to the Land of Tsukushi. She therefore
  instructed them, saying :-' Do ye, three Deities, go down
  and dwell in the centre of the province, where you will
  assist the descendants of Heaven,s and receive worship
  from them.'"
      In one writing it is said :-" When Sosa no wo no
   Mikoto was about to ascend to Heaven, there was a Deity
  '\\yhose name was Ha-akaru-tama. 4 This Deity came to
1 Lady of the island of the offing.

:: Nuna-~i,-perhaps for n1ana-wi, i.e. true \vell.
a i.e. the Emperors.                           4 Feather-bright-gem.
         12                             NIHONGI.

              meet him and presented to him beautiful maga-tama 1 of
              Yasaka je\vels. So Sosa no wo no Mikoto took these
              gems and went up to Heaven. At this time Ama-teraSll




                                        Magatama.

              no Oho-kami, suspecting that the intentions of her younger
              brother were evil, prepared \var and questioned him. Sosa
              no wo no Mikoto answered and said :-' Truly the sole
              reason of my coming is that I wished to see my elder
              sister face to face, and moreover to present to her these
              beautiful curved jewels of Yasaka gem. I dare not have
              any other purpose.' Then Ama-terasu no Oho-kami asked
I. 35.        him again, saying :-' Wherewithal wilt thou prove to me
              whether thy words are true or false?' He answered and
              said :-' Let thee and me bind ourselves by an oath. If
              while we are bound by this oath, the children prvduced are
              females, my heart is to be accounted black, but if they are
              males, it is to be thought red.' So they dug three true-
              wells of Heaven and stood opposite to one another. Then
              Ama-terasu no Oho-kami spoke to Sosa no wo no Mikoto
              and said :-' I am now about to give thee the sword which
              is in my girdle; do thou give me the curved jewels of
              Yasaka gem which thou hast.' Having thus covenanted
              they made a mutual exchange. Then Ama-terasu no
              Oho-kami took the curved jewels of Yasaka gem, and
              having made them float on the true-well of Heaven, bit
              off the heads of the jewels and blew them away. The
              Deity which ,vas produced from amidst l1er breath was
              called Ichiki-shima-hime no Mikoto. This is the Goddess
              who dwells in Oki-tsu miya. Again, a Deity was produced

           1 Maga-talua, curved je\vels, are the conlma-shaped gen1s of cornelian or

         other stones frequently seen in museUlns in Japan.
                     THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                 39
      from amidst her breath when she bit through and blew
      away the middle parts of the jewels. This Deity was.
      called Ta-gori-hime no Mikoto. It is she who dwells in
      Naka-tsu miya. Again a Deity was produced from amidst
      her breath when she bit through and blew away the tails
      of the jewels. This Deity was called Tagi-tsu-hime no
      Mikoto. It is she who dwells in He-tsu miya. 1 In all
      there were three female Deities.
         Upon this Sosa no wo no Mikoto, taking the sword
      which he held, and having nlade it to float on the surface
      of the True-Well of Heaven, bit off the end of the sword
      and blew it away. The Deities which were produced from
      amidst his breath were called Ama no ho-hi no Mikoto,
      next Masa-ya-a katsu-katsu-no-haya-hi-ama-no oshi-ho-ne-
      no Mikoto, next Ama-tsu hiko-ne no Mikoto, next Iku-
      tsu hiko-ne no Mikoto, and next Kum~no no kusu-hi no
      Mikoto. In all there were five male Deities. Such is the
      story."
         In one writing it is said :-" The Sun-Goddess stood
      opposite to Sosa no wo no Mikoto, separated from hitn by
      the Tranquil River of Heaven,2 and established a covenant
      with him, saying, ' If thou hast not a traitorous heart, the I. 36
      children which thou wilt produce will surely be males, and
      if they are males, I will consider them my children, and
      will cause them to govern the Plain of Heaven.' Hereupon
      the Sun-Goddess first ate her ten-span sword, \vhich became
      converted into a child, the Goddess Oki·tsu-shima hime
      no Mikoto, also called Ichiki-shima hime no Mikoto.
      N ext she ate her nine-span sword, which became converted
      into a child, the Goddess Tagi-tsu hime no 1\fikoto. Again
      she ate her eight-span s\\lord, which became converted
      into a child, the Goddess Ta-giri hime no Mikoto. Upon
      this, Sosa no wo no Mikoto took in his mouth the string of
      500 jewels which was entwined in the left knot of his hair,
      and placed it on the palm of his left hand, whereupon it
      became converted into a male child. He then said :-' Truly
  1 Oki.tsu miya means the "shrine of the offing;" Naka-tsu miya, the
" middle shrine;" He-tsu miya, the " shrine of the shore."     Ichiki-shima is
the same as ltsuku shima, the sacred island near Hiroshima in the Inland Sea.
  ~ Ffhe Milky Way.

                                                                   E
    40                               NIHONGI.

           I have ,,"on.' And the child was therefore called Katsu no
           haya-hi ama no oshi-ho-mimi no Mikoto. After that he
           took in his mouth the jewels of the right knot of his hair,
           and placed them on the palm of his right hand, when they
           became changed and produced the God Ama no ho-hi no
           Mikoto. After that he took in his mouth the jewels which
           hung round his neck and laid them on his left fore-arm,
           when they became changed and produced the God Ama-
           tsu hiko-ne no Mikoto. Moreover, from his right fore-arm
          there was produced the God Iku-tsu hiko-ne no Mikoto.
           Again from his left foot was produced the God Hi no
           haya-hi no Mikoto. Again from his right leg was produced
           Kumano no oshi-homi-no Mikoto, also called Kumano no
           oshi-sumi no Mikoto. The children produced by Sosa no
           wo no Mikoto were all male children. Therefore the Sun-
            Goddess knew exactly that Sosa no ,vo no Mikoto's inten-
           tions had been from the first honest. So these six male
           children were taken and made the children of the Sun-
           Goddess, and were caused to govern the Plain of Heaven.
           The three female Deities born of the Sun-Godaess were
            made to descend and dwell at Usa-shima in the Reed-plain
            Central Land.! They are now in the middle of the
            Northern Sea province, and are styled the MiGhi-nushi no
1.37.       Muchi. 2 These are the Deities which are \vorshipped by
            the Kimi of Minuma in Tsukushi."
        After this Sosa no wo no Mikoto's behaviour was exceedingly
      rude. In what way? Ama-terasll no Oho-kami had made
      august rice-fields of Heavenly narrow rice-fields and Heavenly
      long rice-fields. Then Sasa no wo no Mikato, \\?hen the seed
      was sown in spring, broke down the divisions between the plots
      of rice, and in autumn let loose the Heavenly piebald colts, 3
      and made them lie d'own in the midst of the rice-fields. Again,
      when he saw that Ama-terasu no Oho-kami was about to
      celebrate the feast of first-fruits, he secretly voided excrement
        I' Ashihara no Naka tSll kunj, i.e. Japan.     The phrase Central Land i~
      suspiciously like Chinese.
         J Province-roaster-honoured ones or possessors.

         3 Indian Inyth has a piebald or spotted deer or cow among celestial objects.

      The idea is probably suggested by the appearance of the stars. It is doubt-
      ful whether colt should be singular or plural.
                      TI-IE: AGE OF TIlE GODS.                                41
in the New 1 Palace. l\'Ioreover, when he saw that Ama-terasu
no Oho-kami was in her sacred 2 weaving hall, engaged in
weaving the garments of the Gods, he flayed a piebald colt of
Heaven, and breaking a hole in the roof-tiles of the hall, flung
it in. Then Ama-terasu no Oho-kami started with alarm, and
wounded herself with the shuttle. Indignant at this, she
straightway entered tIle Rock-cave of Heaven, and having
fastened the Rock-door, dwelt there in seclusion. Therefore
constant darkness prevailed on all sides, and the alternation of
night and day was unknown. 3                                     I. 38.

   ) For the sake of greater purity in celebrating the festival.
  2   The Chinese character here translated sacred is . , the prinlary
meaning of which is abstinence, fasting. In the ., Nihongi," ho\vever, it
represents the Japanese word ihahi (pronounced i\\"ai). ..~ccording to
Hirata this contains the same root as ilUi, avoidance, especially religious
avoidance of impurity, and had originally the sanle lneaning. The yu of
yu-niha, or sacred plot of ground \vhere rice for the festival of first-fruits was
gro\\'n, is the same root. But as a strict observance of conditions of cere-
nlonial purity \\'as a chief feature of the Shinto services, this \vard catne to
be put for religious rites generally, and the Chinese character is even used,
if we may believe the interlinear gloss \\'hich renders it by ogalni, for Buddhist
celebrations. The usual modern meaning of ihahi is blessing, well-\vishing,
congratulation, where \ve have got a long \\'ay from the original sense of
tabu, avoidance.
    Ritual purity is of the very essence of Shinto. It applies to food, clothing,
and language. There \vas in later times a special set of tern1S for certain
Buddhist objects and ideas. It \vas probably to avoid contan1ination to the
ordinary d\velling that special huts "-ere erected for the consumlnation of
111arriage, and for childbirth. Death contalninated a house, and therefore a
new one had to be erected on the decease of the o\vner, a practice \vhich was
long continued in the case of Inlperial Palaces.
   ;1 An1a-terasu no Oho.kami is throughout the greater part of this narrative

an anthropoluorphic Deity, \vith little that is specially characteristic of her
solar functions. Here, ho\vever, it is plainly the. snn itself \vhich \vithholds
its light and leaves the \vorld to darkness. This inconsistency, which has
greatly exercised the native theologians (see Satow's "Revival of Pure
Shinto," p. 50, reprint), is not peculiar to Japanese myth. Muir, in the
introduction to Vol. V. of his" Sanskrit Texts," says :-" The saIne visible
object was at different tilues regarded diversely as being either a portion of
the inanilnate universe, or an animated being and a cos111ical po,ver. Thus
in the Vedic hymns, the sun, the sky, and the earth are severally considered,
sometimes as natural objects governed by particular gods, and sometilues as
themselves gods who generate and control other beings." But this difficulty
is inherent in alllnythologies.
12                               NIIIONGI.

  Then the eighty myriads of Gods met on the bank of the
Tranquil River of Heaven, and considered in what manner they
should supplicate her. Accordingly Omohi-kane 1 no Kami,
with profound device and far-reaching thought, at length gathered
long-singing birds ~ of the Eternal Land and made them
utter their prolonged cry to one another. Moreover he
made Ta-jikara-wo 3 no Kami to stand beside the Rock-door.
Then Arne no Koyane 4 no Mikoto, ancestor of the Nakatomi
no Muraji,b and Futo-dama no Mikoto,6 ancestor of the Imibe 7

  1   Thought-combining or thought-including.
  2   The cock is meant.                    3 Hand-strength-male.

   4 Ko-yane is written \\lith t\"O characters which luean child and roof:

 Hirata (" Koshiden," \Tol. XI II., p. I) identifies this Deity with Omohi-kane
no Mikoto, and endeavours to sho\\' that ko is for kokoro, heart. Ya, he
thinks, is nlany, and ne a honorific. See also Ch. K., p. 56. I agree with
 eh. that the Ineaning is obscure.
   r. Hirata and Motowori have "'fitten Inany pages on the derivation of
 Nakatomi. The former takes it to be for Naka-tori-lnochi, \vhich would give
the Ineaning mediator, these officials being regarded as go-betweens for
the Kimi, or sovereign, in his intercourse \\1ith the Kami. Perhaps it is safest
to follow the Chinese characters which mean "middle-minister," in Japanese
Naka-tsu-omi, tsu being a genitive particle. The Nakatomi would then be
the Ininisters of middle rank, as opposed to Prinle Ministers on the one
hand, and underlings on the other. In historical times their duties \vere of
a priestly character. Worship and governnlent were closely associated in
ancient tillles in nlore countries than Japan. l\latsurigoto, government, is
derived froln nlatsuri, \vorship. It \vas they \vho recited the Harahi or
purification rituals.
   6 Futo-dalna, big-jewel.

   7 Imi-be or inlbe is derived {rOin imi, root of inlu, to avoid, to shun,
to practise religious abstinence, and be, a hereditary corporation.
The original function of the Imibe \vill be understood from the follow-
ing extract {roln a Chinese book \vritten not long after the Christian
Epoch :-" They (i.e. the Japanese) appoint a man whom they call an
, abstainer.' He is not allowed to comb his hair, to \\'·ash, to eat Ineat, or
to approach WOluen. When they are fortunate they make hinl presents,
but if they fall ill, or Ineet \vith disaster, they set it down to the
, abstainer's' failure to keep his vows, and together they put him to
death." Compare ,vith this the follo\ving paragraph frolll a recent American
ne\vspaper.
                      "AN UNLUCKY MEDICINE MAN.
   Big Bob \\raS a proillinent lnelnber of the tribe, and claimed to be a
" tenaninlous" l1lan, \vhich, translated fronl the Chinook, means an Indian
doctor. By Indian superstition a "tenanimous" lnan is held responsible if
                      THE AGE OF TIlE GODS.                                  43
no Obito, dug up a five-hundred branched True Sakaki 1 I. 39·
tree of the Heavenly Mt. Kagu. 2 On its upper branches they
hung Iln august five-hundred string of Yasaka je,,,,els. On the
middle branches they hung an eight-hand 3 mirror.

any general calalnity befalls the tribe. Things had not been going \vell \vith
the Swinonlish Indians for some tilne. There \vas much sickness among
them, and Big Bob \vas regarded as responsible for it. So at a meeting of
 the tribe four Indians \vere appointed to execute hiln. The day upon which
 the murder took place Big Bob was \vaylaid by four assassins, \vho seized
 him, held him, and cut his throat fronl ear to ear. The red men \vere
 arrested and bound over for nlurder by the] l1stice of the Peace of Laconner."
    In the "Nihongi " tinles the Ilnibe occupied a subordinate position in
performing the cerenlonies of Shinto, and at a still later period this term
became a mere surnalne. Vide Sato\\', "~t\ncient Rituals," in "].A.S.T.,"
\'01. VII., Pt. 11., p. 126
   The Be, or hereditary corporations, \vere a peculiar institution of Old Japan.
This tenn has been rather inadequately rendered by clan, tribe, or guild.
:But they differed froin claps, as it was not even supposed that there \\Tas any
tie of blood-relationship bet\veen the various classes of luembers. And if \\Te
call them guilds we lose sight of their hereditary character, and of the fact
that they ,,'ere essentially branches of the Government. Perhaps if \\'e
imagine the staff of one of our dockyards in \vhich the director and officials
should be drawn from the governing class, the artisans being serfs, and the
whole having a more or less hereditary character, we shall have a tolerable
idea of a Be. The origin of some, as of the Imibe, is lost in antiquity, but
many "Tere instituted in historical times, and for all luanner of objects.
There \\'ere Be of \\'eavers (Oribe), of figured-stuff \\'eavers (Ayabe), of
executioners (Osakabe), of fishers (Anlabe), of fanners (Tanabe), of clay-
workers (Hasebe or Hashibe), and many more. The sole function of saine
,vas to perpetuate the name of a childless Emperor or Empress. The local
habitation of these corporations ,vas also called Be, just as our word
admiralty may mean either a body of officials or the building where they
discharge their duties. This accounts for the frequency \vith \vhich this
 termination occurs in nanles of places. A familiar exalnple is Kobe, the
 open port in the Inland Sea. Kobe is for Kami-be, and Ineant originally the
 group of peasants allotted to the service of a Deity (of Ikuta ?), and hence
the village where they lived. A good number of Japanese surnanles contain
 the same termination.
    O-bito is a title of nobility, perhaps for Oho-bito, great man. It is
 represented by a Chinese character \vhich Ineans head or chief.
    1 The Sakaki or Cleyera ]aponica, is the sacred tree of the Shinto

 religion. It is used in Shinto religious cerenl0nies at the present day.
    t Mt. Kagu is the name of a mountain in Yalnato.      It is here supposed to
 have a counterpart in Heaven.
    3 In Japanese yata-kagami, ,vhich is literally" eight-hand mirror.~      The
      44                               NIHONGI.

                One \vriting says 11a-futsu no I{agami.
           On its lower branches they hung blue soft offerings and white
        soft offerings. l Then they recited their liturgy~ together.
           Moreover Ama no U zume 2 no Mikoto, ancestress of the
                 3
I. 40 • Sarume no Kimi, took in her hand a spear \vreathed with
        Eulalia grass, and standing before the door of the Rock-cave
        of Heaven, skilfully performed a mimic dance." She took,
        moreover, the true Sakaki tree of the Heavenly Mount Kagu,
        and made of it a head-dress, she took club-moss and nlade of
        it braces/ she kindled fires,6 she placed a tub bottom l~p\vards,;
                  j



        and gave forth a divinely-inspired utterance. 8

      \vord ta (for te, hand) may here be a Ineasure of length, an explanation \vhich
      is favoured by the Chinese character used for it in the "Nihongi." The
      hand is a hand's length, not a hand's breadth, as ,vith us. The yata-kagalni
       \vould therefore be "a 111irror of large size."
         There are ancient Inirrors in Japan "'ith a nUll1ber of suzu or bells project-
      ing round theIn, or of an octagonal shape, and I anl disposed to think that
      the epithet yata has reference to this peculiarity, the corners or projections
      being taken for handles. Compare the analogous ,vord Yatagarasu (Index).
         I t is said to be this l11irror \\,hich is \vorshipped at Ise as an eUlblem of
      the Sun-Goddess. See Sato\v's " Handbook," second edit., p. 176.
         1 The blue \vere of hempen cloth, and the \\'bite of the paper-nlulberry

      cloth. By blue probably the colour of undyed helnpen stuff is lneant. The
      Japanese \vord a\vo, blue, is used very loosely. Some take soft in the
      Juetaphorical sense of" propitiatory." These offerings are the originals of
      the Gobei, or strips of paper \yreathed round a \vand, \vhich are no\v seen set
      up in every Shinto shrine.
         2 Terrible feluate of Heaven.                   3 Monkey-felnale.
         4 This is said to be the origin of the I(agura or pantolnilnic dance no\\'

       perfornled at Shinto festivals.                                           t


         a The braces or shoulder straps ,vere to support a tray for carrying thing-s.
       and so assist the anns. The Japanese \vord is tasuki, \vhich nleans
       assistance.
         6 A prototype of the nihabi (courtyard fires) of later Shinto \vorship.

         7 The "N ihongi" strangely omits to say that, as \ve learn frolll the
       " Kojiki," she danced on this and made it give out a sound.
         S In Hirata's version of the ancient 111ythical narrati,"e, he introduces here

       an incantation said in the" Kiujiki " to have been taught by the Sun-Goddess
       to Ninigi no l\fikoto, but stated in the "Ko-go-jiui" to have come do,,'n
       originally from Uzulue no Mikoto. It consists of the syllables Hito-futa-
       mi-yo-itsu-mu-nana-ya-kokono-tari, \\"hich Hirata has tried hard to extract
       SOlne D1eaning out of. Hito, he says, is nlan, futa, the lid, i.e. the door of
       the rock-cave, lniyo is the imperative of ll1iru, to see, this phrase lneaning
       " Look ~ ye Gods at the door!" and so on. That these "'ords are no\\'
                     TIlE AGE OF THE GODS.                                45
  Now Ama-terasu no Oho-kami heard this, and said :-" Since
I have shut myself up in the Rock-cave, there ought surely to
be continual night in the Central Land of fertile reed-plains.
How then can Ama no U zume no l\fikoto be so jolly?" So
with her august hand, she opened for a narrow space the Rock-
door and peeped out. Then Ta-jikara-wo no Kami forthwith
took Ama-terasu no Oho-kami by the hand, and led her out.
Upan this the Gods Nakatomi no Rami and Imibe no Kami 1
at once drew a limit by means of a bottom-tied rope 2 (also I. 41 •
called a left-hand rope) and begged her not to return again (into
the cave).
   After this all the Gods put the blame on Sosa no wo no
Mikoto, and imposed on him a fine of one thousand tables':i
and so at length chastised him. They also had his hair
plucked out, and made him therewith expiate his guilt.
        Another version is:-They made him expiate it by
     plucking out the nails of his hands and feet.
   When this was done, they at last banished him do\vnwards.
        In one writing it is said :-" After this \Vaka-hiru-me 4 no
     Mikoto ,vas in the sacred weaving-hall, weaving the
     garments of the Deities. Sosa no wo no Mikoto saw this,
     and forthwith flaying a piebald colt with a backward
     flaying, flung it into the interior of the hall. Then Waka-
     hiru-me no Mikoto was startled, and fell down from the
     loom, wounding herself with the shuttle which she held in
     her hand, and divinely departed. i Therefore Ama-teraSll
     no Oho-kami spoke to Sa sa no wo no Mikoto and said:-
     'Thou hast still evil intentions. 6 I do not \vish to see thee
     face to face.' So she entered the Rock-cave of Heaven and

simply the numerals froln one to ten cannot be denied, but this, he argues,
is a later application. The" Kojiki" gives other details of the conduct of
this Goddess which the" Nihongi" dra\vs a veil over.
   1 These (;ods' names were properly Koyane no l\fikoto and Futo-dama no

Mikoto (see above), but here the names of their human descendants are
substituted.
   2 Shiri-kunle-naha, now called shime-naha, a rope         made of stra\v of
rice which has been pulled up by the roots. See Ch. K., p. 59.
   3 By tables are meant tables of offerings, as in the illustrations.
   " Young-Sun-female, a younger sister of the Sl1n.. Goddes~.
   o i.e. died..                       6 Lit. a black heart.
         46                        NIHONGI.

              shut the Rock-door. Hereupon all under Heaven was in
              continual darkness, and there was no difference of day and
              night. Therefore the eighty Inyriads of Gods met in the
I. 42.        High-market-place of Heaven and made inquiry. Now




              there was Omohi.kane no Rami, son of Taka·mi-musubi
              no Mikoto, who had a talent for devising plans. He
              accordingly considered the matter, and spoke, saying, 'Let
              there be made an image of this Goddess, and let prayer
                     THE AGE OF TfIE GODS.                                47
     be addressed to it.' They therefore proceeded to appoint
     Ishi-kori-dome 1 as· artisan, who, taking copper of the
      Mt. Kagu of Heaven, made therefrom a Sun-spear.
     Moreover, he stripped off in one piece the hide of a true
     stag, and made of it Heavenly bellows. The Goddess
     which he fashioned by this means is the Goddess Hi no
     mahe no Kami, who dwells in the province of KiL"
        In one writing it is said :-" The august Sun Goddess
     took an enclosed rice-field and made it her Imperial rice-
     field. Now Sosa no wo no Mikoto, in spring, filled up the
     channels and broke do\vn the divisions, and in autumn,
     when the grain was formed, he forthwith stretched round
     them division ropes.' Again wIlen the Sun-Goddess was in
     her Weaving-Hall, he flayed alive a piebald colt and flung
     it into the Hall. In all these various matters his conduct
     was rude in the highest degree. Nevertheless, the Sun-
     Goddess, out of her friendship for him, was not indignant or
     resentful, but took everything calmly and with forbearance. I. 43.
        When the time came for the Sun-Goddess to celebrate
     the feast of first-fruits, Sosa no wo no Mikoto secretly
     voided excrement under her august seat in the New
     Palace. 3 The Sun-Goddess, not knowing this, went
     straight there and took her seat. Accordingly the Sun-
     Goddess drew herself up, and was sickened. She therefore
     was enraged, and straightway took up her abode in the
     Rock-cave of Heaven, and fastened its Rock-door.
        Then all the Gods were grieved at this, and forthwith
     caused Ama no nuka-do no Kami, the ancestor of the Be
     of mirror-makers, to make a mirror, Futo-dama, the
     ancestor of the Imibe, to make offerings/ and Toyo-tama,i
     the ancestor of the Be ofjewel-makers, to make jewels. They
     also caused Yama-tsuchi f\ to procure eighty precious
     combs of the five-hundred-branched true sakaki tree) and
      Nu-dzuchi 7 to procure eight)T precious combs of the five-
      hundred-branched suzuki grass. When all these various
  1 The meaning is doubtful, as also whether this Deity is a God or a
Goddess.
  2 i.e. ropes drawn along the divisions of the rice-fields in token of owner-

ship.                                   3 See above, p. 41.
  4 Of cloth.       5 Rich-jewel.       6 Mountain-god.          7 Moor-god.
         48                             NIHONGI.

              objects were collected, Ama no Koyane no Mikoto, the
I. 4~.        ancestor of the Nakatomi, recited a liturgy in honour of
              the Deity'. Then the Sun-Goddess opened the Rock-door
              and came out. At this time, when the mirror was put into
              the Rock-cave, it struck against the door and received a
              slight flaw, which remains until this day. This is the
              great Deity worsllipped at Ise. After this Sosa no wo nQ
              Mikoto was convicted, and fined in the articles req uired
              for the ceremony of purification. Hereupon these \vere the
              things abhorrent of luck of the tips of his fingers, and the
              things abhorrent of calamity of the tips of his toes. l Again,
              of his spittle he made white soft offerings, and of his nose-
              mucus he made blue soft offerings, with which the purifica-
              tion service was performed. Finally he was banished
              according to the law of Divine banishment."
I. 45.           In one writing it is said :-" After this the Sun-Goddess
              had three rice-fields, which were called the Easy 2 Rice-
              field of Heaven, the Level Rice-field of Heaven, and the
              Village-join 3 Rice-field of Heaven. All these were good
              rice-fields, and never suffered even after continuous rain or
              drought. Now Sosa no wo no Mikoto had also three
              rice-fields, which were called the Pile-field of Heaven,4
              the River-border Ii Field of Heaven, and the Mouth-
              Sharp 6 Field of Heaven. All these were barren places.
              In the rains, the soil was swept away, and in droughts
              it was parched up. Therefore, Sosa no wo no Mikoto
              was jealous and destroyed his elder sister's rice-fields. In
              spring, he knocked away the pipes and troughs, filled up
              the channels and broke down the divisions. He also
              sowed seed over again. In autumn, he set up combs,7 and

           1 No very satisfactory explanation is given by the COlnlnentators of this

         sentence. Hirata understands the things abhorrent of luck, etc., to be
         things required for the purification service.
           2 Easy to cultivate, says the" Shukai" editor.
           3 Mura-abase, a term of doubtful Ineaning.     Motowori suggests that for
         abase we should read yori. The ll1eaning then would be rice-fields adjoin..
         ing the village. Accomnlodation land, as we should say•
           .. Obstructed with stumps of wood.
           , Exposed to inundation.                    r, Exposed to drought?

           1 The "Shiki " explains that combs were stuck up in the rice-fields with
                     THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                 49
      made horses lie down in the rice-fields. Not¥lithstanding
     all these wicked doings, which went on incessantly, the
      Sun-Goddess was not indig-nant, but treated him al\va)Ts
      with calmness and forbearance, etc., etc.
         \Vhen the Sun-Goddess came to shut herself up in the I. 46 .
      Rock-cave of Heaven, all the Gods sent the child of Kogoto
      Musubi, Ama no Koyane no Mikoto, the ancestor of the
      Nakatomi no Muraji, and made him recite a liturgy.
      Hereupon Ama no Koyane no Mikoto rooted up a true
      Sakaki tree of the Heavenly Mount Kagu and hung upon
      its upper branches a mirror of eight hands, made by the
     ancestor of the mirror-makers, Ono-kori-dome, a child of
     Ama no N ukado ; on the middle branches he hung curved 1
     je\vels of Yasaka gem made by the ancestor of the jewel-
     makers, Ama no Akaru-dama, a child of Izanagi no Mikoto.
     On the lower branches he hung tree-fibre 2 made by Ama-
     no Hi-\\Tashi, the ancestor of the Imbe of the province of
     Aha. Futo-dama no Mikoto, ancestor of the Imbe no
     Obito, was thereupon made to take these things in his
     hand, and, with lavish and earnest words of praise, to recite
     a liturgy.
         \\Then the Sun-Goddess heard this, she said :-' Though
     of late many prayers have been addressed to me, of none
     has the language been so beautiful as this.' So she opened
     a little the Rock-door and peeped out. Thereupon the God
     Ama no Tajikara-wo no Kami, who was waiting beside the
     Rock-door, forthwith pulled it open, and the radiance of
     the Sun-Goddess filled the universe. Therefore all the
     Gods rejoiced greatly, and imposed on Sasa no wo no
     Mikoto a fine of a thousand tables of (articles of) purifica- I. 47
     tion. ii Of the nails of his hands they made things abhorrent

\vords of incantation, so that if anyone wrongly claimed the fields he might
be destroyed. "The present custom of setting up combs in rice-fields \",hose
o\vnership is disputed arose perhaps {roin this."
  1 The curved jewels are the \vell-known lnaga-talna, numbers of \vhich have

been preserved. They are Inade of chalcedony, jasper, nephrite, chrysophrase,
serpentine, steatite, crystal, etc. Some of these materials are not found in
Japan.
  ~ Made of the bark of the paper-mulberry.
  :{ The \yord karahz" or harahe not only means purification, but an 10-
         50                              NIHONGI.

              of luck, and of the nails of his feet they made things abhor-
              rent of calamity. Then they caused Ama no Koyane no
              Mikoto to take charge of his Great Purification Liturgy;
              and made him recite it. This is the reason why the people
              of the world are careful in the disposal of their own nails. 1
                  After this, all the Gods upbraided Sosa no wo no Mikoto,
              saying :-' Thy conduct has been in the highest degree
              improper. Thou must, therefore, not dwell in Heaven.
              Nor must thou dwell in the Central Reed-Plain Land.
              Thou must ~o speedily to the Bottom Nether Land.' 2 So
              together they drove hiln away downwards. Novv this was
              at the time of continuous rains. Sosa no wo no Mikoto
              bound together green grass, and made of it a broad hat and
              rain-coat, and in this garb asked a lodging of the assemble:i
              Gods. They said :-' Thy behaviour has been filth~y and
              wicked, and therefore thou hast been banished. How
              canst thou ask of us a lodging?' In the end they unani-
              mously repulsed him. Therefore, although the wind and
               rain were very violent, he was unable to find a resting-
               place, and went downwards, suffering bitterly. Ever since
               that time all the world has avoided entering the house of
               another wearing a broad hat and a grass rain-coat, or
               bearing a bundle of grass on the back. For a breach of
I. 48.         these rules an expiatory fine is certainly imposed. This is
               an institution which has come down to us from remote
               antiquity.
                  After this, Sosa no wo no Mikoto said :-' All the Gods
               have banished me, and I am now about to depart for ever.
               Why should I not see my elder sister face to face; and
               why take it on me of my own accord to depart without more
               ado?' So he again ascended to Heaven, disturbing Heaven
               and disturbing Earth. Now Arne no Uzume, seeing this,
                reported it to the Sun-Goddess. The Sun-G'oddess said :-
                'My younger brother has no good purpose in coming up.


         demnity or "da.mages" paid by an offender. "Expiatory fine" would,
         perhaps, be a good rendering here. See Index-Purgation.
           1 Referring to a superstition, not confined to Japan, as to cutting the nails

         on particular days and burying the parings.
           2 Yonli, or Hades.
                     THE AGE OF TILE GODS.                              12

     It is surely because he wishes to rob me of my kingdom.
     Though I am a woman, why should I shrink?' So she
     arrayed herself in martial garb, etc., etc.
         Thereupon Sosa no wo no Mikoto swore to her, and
     said :-' If I have come up again cherishing evil feelings,
     the children which I shall now produce by chewing jewels
     \\Till certainly be f~males, and in that case they must be
     sent down to the Central Land of Reed-Plains. But if my
     intentions are pure, then I shall produce male children,
     and in that case they must be made to rule the Heavens.
     The same oath will also hold good as to the children pro-
     duced by my elder sister.' In this way the Sun-Goddess
     first of all chewed her ten-span sword, etc., etc.
         Sosa no wo no Mikoto straightway unwound, coil after
     coil, the complete string of five hundred jewels entwined in
     the right knot of his hair. The jewels chinked as he rinsed
     them on the surface of the true well of Heaven. Then he
     che\ved their ends, and laid them on his left palm, thus
     producing a child, \\'~ho was called Masa-ya-a-katsu-katsu-
     haya-hi-ama-no-oshi-ho-ne no Mikoto. After this he
     che\ved the left jevJels, and placing them on-his right palm,
     produced a child, \vho \vas called Ama-no-ho-hi no Mikoto.
     He is the ancestor of the Idzumo no Omi, of the Musashi
      no Miyakko,l and of the Hashi no Muraji. There was next
     produced Ama tsu hikone no Mikoto, the ancestor of the I. 49.
     Mubaraki 2 no Miyakko and of the Nukada Be no Muraji.
     Next was produced Iku-me tsu hikone no Mikoto, and
     next Kumano no Oho-sulni no Mikoto-in all six male
     Deities. Then Sosa no \VO no l\1ikoto spoke to the Sun-
     Goddess, and said :-' The reason why I can1e up a second
     time was that, having been condemned by the assembled
     Gods to banishment to the Nether Land, and being about
     to take my departure thither, I could never bear to become
     separated from my elder sister without having seen her
     face to face. Therefore it is truly with a pure heart, and
     not otherwise, that I came up again. Now that our inter-
     view is over, I must return hence for ever to the Nether

  I Or Miya-tsu-ko, originally provincial governors, after\vards hereditary

local nobles.                                 :! In Hitachi.
      12                              NIHONGI.

            Land, in obedience to the Divine behest of the assembled
            Deities. I pray that my elder sister may illuminate the
            Land of Heaven, and that it may spontaneously enjoy tran-
            quillity. Moreover, I deliver to my elder sister the children
            which, with a pure heart, I have produced.' Having done
            so, he returned down,vards."
         Then Sosa no wo no Mikoto descended from Heaven and
       proceeded to the head-waters of the River Hi, in the province
I. 50. of Idzumo. At this time he heard a sound of weeping at the
       head-\vaters of the river, and he therefore went in search of the
       sound. He found there an old man and an old "Toman.
       Between them was set a :young girl, whom they were caressing
       and lamenting over. Sosa no wa no Mikoto asked them,
       saying :-" Who are ye, and why do ye lament thus?" The
       ans,ver was :-" I am an Earthly Deity, and my name is Ashi-
       nadzuchLl My \vife's name is Te-nadzuchi. 2 This girl is
       our daugllter, and }ler name is Kushi-nada-hime. 3 The reason
       of our .\veeping is that formerly we had eight children,
       daughters. But they have been devoured year after :year by' an
       eight 4-forked serpent, and no,v the time approaches for this
       girilo be devoured. There is no means of escape for her, and
 I 51. therefore do we grieve."      Sosa no wo no Mikoto said :-" If
       that is so, ,vilt thou give Ole thy daughter?" He replied, and
       said :-" I will comply with thy behest and give her to thee."
       Therefore Sasa no wo no l\1ikoto on the spot changed I,-ushi-
       nada-hime into a many-toothed close-comb, which he stuck in
       the august knot of his hair. Then he made Ashi-nadzllchi and
       Te-nadzuchi to brew eight-fold sake, to make eight cupboards,
       in each of them to set a tub filled with sake, 5 and so to
        1   Foot- stroke-elder.
        ~   Hand-stroke-elder. These nanles refer to the caressing of the young
      girl by her parents.
        3 Kushi-nada-hime.      Wondrous Inada-princess.
         -1 Eight-in Japanese yatsu.    This "'ord is here used as a nU111eraI. But
      in many places in the old Japanese literature it must be taken in what I
      regard as its prinlary sense of" many," " several," as in the word yatagarasu
      -the 111any-handed crow-\vhich had really only three cla,,·s. In Corean
      the \vord yoro, \vhich means luany, is, I think, the same root that we haye in
      yol, ten-words \vhich are probably identical \vith the Japanese yatsu. The
      Japanese \vord yorodzu, 111yriad, belongs to the same group.
         a Sake is an intoxicating liquor bre\ved from rice.
                     THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                 53
a\Valt Its coming. When the time came, the serpent actually
appeared. It had an eight-forked head and an eight-forked
tail; its eyes \vere red, like the winter-cherry; 1 and on its back
firs and cypresses were growing. As it crawled it extended
over a space of eight hills and eight valleys. Now ,vhen it
came and founq the sake, each head drank up one tub, and it
became drunken and fell asleep. Then So sa no wo no ~1ikoto
drew the ten-span sword which he wore, and chopped the
serpent into small pieces. When he came to the tail, the edge
of his s\vord was slightly notched, and he therefore split open
the tail and examined it. In the inside there was a sword. I. 52.
This is the sword which is called Kusa-nagi no tsurugi.~
         I}l one writing it is said :-" Its original name was Ama
      no Mura-kumo no tsurugi." 3
   [It perhaps rece£ved this ?zame fro1n the clouds constantly gather-
£llg over the place where the serpent was. In the til1le of tke
Imperial Prince Yamato-dake -its 1ZallZe was changed to Kusa-nagi
no tsurugi. ]
   Sosa no wo no Mikoto said :_H This is a divine sword. How
can I presume to appropriate it to myself?" So he gave it up
to the Gods of Heaven. 4
   After this he went in search of a place where he might cele-
brate his marriage, and at length came to Suga, in the province
of Idzumo. Then he spoke, and said :-" My heart is
refreshed." Therefore that place is now called Suga. i There
he built a palace.
        One version says :-" Now Take fi Sosa no wo no
      lVlikoto composed a verse of poetry, saying :-

                       Many clouds arise,                                        I. 53·
                       On all sides a manifold fence,
                       To receive within it the spouses,


  1 Hirata thinks that the akakagachi, here translated, on the authority of

the" Original Commentary," by "red ,,,,inter-cherry," ,vas really a kind of
snake.
  2 The grass-lnower.   See Index-Kusa-nagi.
  3 The s\vord of the gathering clouds of Heaven.

  4 It is hardly necessary to point out the reselnblance of this story to that
of Perseus and Andromeda, and many others.
  & Suga means pure, fresh.                     6 Fierce.
54                                 NIHONGJ.

                         They foml a lnanifold fence-
                         Ah ! that Inanifold fence t " 1

  Thereupon they had intercourse together,~ and a child was
born named Oho-na-muchi :3 no Kami.
  He (Sosa no wo) accordingl~y spake, and said :-" The
masters of my son's Palace ~ are Ashi-nadzuchi and Te-

  1   In the original-
                            Ya-kulno tatsu
                            Idzu-ll10 ya-he-gaki :
                            Tsuma-gorne ni
                            Ya-he-gaki tsukuru-
                            Sono ya-he-gaki \\'0 !
This poenl is also given in the" Kojiki " (Ch. K., p. 64), \vith the slight yariant
of tsulna-gomi for tsulna..gome in the third line, \vhich lnakes it intransitive
instead of transitive. Idzunlo is \vritten \vith t\VO characters ,,,hich ll1ean
"issuing clouds," as if it were idzuru kUll10. The poeln no doubt alludes to
this ll1eaning and also to the name of the province, but it See111S probable
that the prilnary signification of idzulno here is that given in the translation.
The true derivation of Idzumo, as the nalne of the proYince, is probably
idzu, sacred, and mo, quarter. Idzu-lno is for idzure-1110, as SO-1110 is for
sore-lllO. It has the same 111eaning, I think, in a poem given belo,v (" Reign
of Kenz6," xv. I I).
   This verse of poetry is undoubtedly old, but the regularity of the Inetre
which is a tanka (short poetry) of thirty-one syllables, and its allusi"e
 character, point to a somewhat later date than Inanyof the other poenlS
 contained in the" Nihongi." The fact that it is here relegated to a note is
 some corroboration of this view.
   The poems in this \vork are translated so that a line of the English
version corresponds to a line of Japanese, but it has not always been
 possible to preserve the original order of the lines.
   ~ 'fhe interlinear version has kumi-do ni Inito no Inakuai shite.         I{unli-
 do is no doubt the special nuptial hut above referred to. Mito is " august-
 place " according to Hirata, and is another word for the kl1l11i-do. This
 phrase, which is taken fronl the" Kojiki," probably denotes legitimate nuptial,
 as opposed to casual intercourse. But the Chinese original has nothing of
 the sort.
    I t has been already observed that the erection of a special building for
 the consun1mation of the marriage had a ceremonial as well as a practical
 significance.
   :i Or Oho-na-lnuji, or Oho-na-n10chi, Great..nau1e-possessor.       "[his Deity,
 one of the most prolninent of the Japanese Pantheon, has numerous nalnes
 (Hirata mentions seven). The derivation is not quite clear. See eh. K.,
 p.67.
   4 '[he same word (miya) n1eans also shrine.
                     THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                  55
nadzuchi. I therefore grant to these two Deities the designa-
tion of Inada no Miya-nushi 1 no Kami."
   Having done so, Sosa no wo no Mikoto at length proceeded
to the Nether Land.
         In one writing it is said :_U Sosa no wo no Mikoto,
     having descended from Heaven, came to the head-waters
     of the river Hi, in Idzumo. There he saw Inada-hime, the
     daughter of Susa no yatsu-mimi,2 Master of the Shrine of
     Inada. He had connubial relations with her, and a child
     was born, styled Suga no yu-yama-nushi 3 Mitsu-na-saro-
      hiko-yama-shino." 4
         One version has Suga no Kake-na Saka-karu-hiko-ya-
     shima D no Mikoto.
         Another has :-" Suga no yu-yama-nushi Mitsu-na-saro-
     hiko ya-shima-no. 6 The descendant of this God in the
     fifth generation was Oho-kuni-nushi no Kami." 7
         In one writing it is said :-" At this time Sosa no wo no I. 54-
     Mikoto went down and came to the head-waters of the
     River Ye, in the province of Aki. There was there a God
     ,,,,hose name was Ashi-nadzu-te-nadzu. 8 His wife's name
     was Inada no Miya-nushi Susa no yatsu-mimi. This
     Deity was just then pregnant, and the husband and wife
     sorrowed together. So they informed Sosa no wo no
     Mikoto, saying :-' Though we have had born to us many
     children, whenever one is born, an eight-forked serpent
     comes and devours it, and we have not been able to save
     one. We are now about to have another, and we fear that
     it also will be devoured. Therefore do we grieve.' Sosa
     no wo no Mikoto forthwith instructed them, saying :-' You
   , Shrine 1
     Palace 5 Master.
  2 Susa, name of place; yatsu, eight or luany; mi, august; mi, body or
abstract termination.
  3 Master of the hot-spring mountain of Suga.

  4 Three name-monkey (?) prince-mountain-bamboo-grass.

  S Suga-of-attach-name-pass-light.prince-eight-island.
  I Eight-island-moor.

  7 Great-countrY-lnaster-god.       Identified by Hirata with Oho-na-muji,
also \vith one of the Shichi-fuku-jin, or Seven Gods of Happiness, nan1ed Dai-
koku-salna.
   S Foot-stroke-hand-stroke.

                                                                    F
         56                             NIHONGI.

              must take fruit of all kinds, and brew from it eight jars
              of sake, and I will kill the serpent for you.' The two
              Gods, in accordance with his instructions, prepared sake.
              When the time came for the child to be born, the serpent
              came indeed to the door, and was about to devour the
              child. But Sosa no wo no Mikoto addressed the serpent,
              and said :-' Thou art an Awful Deity. Can I dare to
              neglect to feast thee?' So he took the eight jars of sake,
              and poured one into each of its mouths. The serpent
              drank it up and fell asleep. Sosa no wo no Mikoto drew
              his sword and slew it. When he came to sever its tail,
              the edge of his sword was slightly notched. He split the
              tail open and examined it, when he found that inside it
              there was a sword. This sword is called Kusa-nagi no
              tsurugi. It is now in the village of Ayuchi, in the province
I. 55.        of Ohari. It is this Deity which is in the charge of the
              Hafuri 1 of Atsuta. The sword which slew the serpent is
              called Worochi no Ara-masa. 2 It is now at Isonokami. 3
                 Afterwards the child who was born of Inada no Miya-
              nushi Susa no yatsu-mimi, namely Ina-gami Furu-kushi-
              nada-hime: was removed to the upper waters of the river
              Hi, in the province of Idzumo, and brought up there.
              After this Sosa no wo no Mikoto made her his consort,
              and had by her a child, whose descendant in the sixth
              generation was Oho-na-muchi no Mikoto."
                 In one writing it is said :-" Sosa no wo no Mikoto
              wished to favour· Kushi-nada-hime, and asked her of
              Ashinadzuchi and Tenadzuchi,6 who replied, saying:-
              'We pray thee first to slay the serpent, and thereafter it
              will be good that thou shouldst favour her. This serpent
              has rock-firs growing on each of its heads; on each of
              its sides there is a mountain; it is a very fearful beast.
              How wilt thou set about to slay it?' Sosa no wo no
              Mikoto thereupon devised a plan. He brewed a poisonous

          1 Shinto priests.   Atsuta is near Nagoya.
          , Worochi means serpent; ara, rough; n1asa, true.           :~ In Bizen.
          4 True-hair-touch-wondrous- Inada-princess.

          a I.e. to take to wife.
          6 Note that the mother as well as the father was consulted.
                      THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                  57
     sake, which he gave it to drink. The serpent became
     drunk, and fell asleep. Sasa no wo no Mikoto forthwith
     took his sword, called Worochi no Kara-sabi,l and severed I. 56.
     its head and severed its belly. When he severed its tail,
     the edge of the sword was slightly notched, so he split the
     tail open and made examination. He found there another
     sword, which he called Kusa-nagi no Tsurugi. This
     sword was formerly with Sosa no wo no Mikoto. It is
     now in the province of Ohari. The sword with which
     Sosa no wo no Mikoto slew the serpent is now with the
     Kambe 2 of Kibi. The place \vhere the serpent was slain
     is the mountain at the upper waters of the river Hi in
     Idzumo."
        In one writing it is said :-" Sosa no wo no Mikoto's
     behaviour was unmannerly. A fine was therefore imposed
     on him by all the Gods of a thousand tables, and he was
     driven into banishment. At this time, Sosa no wo no
     Mikoto, accompanied by his son Iso-takeru 3 no Kami,
     descended to the Land of Silla,4 where he d,velt at Soshi-
     mori. D There he lifted up his voice and said :-' I will
     not dwell in this land.' He at length took clay' and made
     of it a boat, in wh.ich he embarked, and crossed over east-
     wards until he arrived at Mount Tori-kamu no Take, \vhich
     is by the upper waters of the river Hi in Idzumo. Now
     there was in this place a serpent which devoured men.
     Sosa no wo no Mikoto accordingly took his sword, called
     Ama no Haye-kiri,6 and slew this serpent. Now,vhen he I. 57·


     1 Serpent's  Kara-blade. Kara is that part of the present pro\'ince
 of Kyong-syang-do in Corea '\\ohich lies S.W. of the Naktong River.
 But the word is used loosely for all Corea, and in modern tinles e,-en for
 China. See Early Japanese History in " ] ..A.. S.T.," \Tol. XVI. Pt. 1., p. 43.
 It was called Mimatla by the Japanese.
     2 The Kambe or Kami-be were the group of peasants charged \\"ith the

 care of a Shinto shrine.
    3 Fifty-courageous.

    " The eastern of the three kingdoms into which Corea ,vas fonnerly
 divided.
   :» This is the traditional Kana pronunciation. It is not clear ,vhether this
is the natue of a person or a place. ~fori may be the Corean moi, Inountain.
   n Fly-cutter.
        12                              NIHONGI.

              cut the serpent's tail, the edge of his sword \\1as notched.
              Thereupon he split open the tail, and on examination,
              found within it a divine s\vord. Sosa no wo no Mikoto
              said :-' I must not take this for my private use.' So he
              sent Ama no Fuki-ne no Kami, his descendant in the fifth
              generation, to deliver it up to Heaven. This is the sword
              no\\" called Kusa-nagi.
                 Before this, when Iso-takeru no Rami descended from
              Heaven, he took down \vith him the seeds of trees in great
              quantit~r. However, he did not plant them in the land of
              Han,l but brought them all back again, and finally sowed
              them everyone throughout the Great Eight-island-country,
              beginning with Tsukushi. Thus green mountains were
              produced. For this reason Iso-takeru no Mikoto "vas
              styled Isaoshi no Kami.~ He is the Great Deity who
              d,\"ells in the Land of KiL" :~
                  In one writing it is stated :-" Sosa no 'va no Mikoto
              said :-' In the region -l of the Land of Han there is gold
              and silver. It \\"ill not be ,veIl if the country ruled by my
              son should not possess floating riches. So he plucked out
              his beard and scattered it. Thereupon Cryptomerias were
1.58.         produced. Moreover, he plucked out the hairs of his
              breast, \vhich became Thuyas. 5 The hairs of his buttocks
               becanle Podocarpi. 6 The hairs of his eye-bro\vs became
               Camphor-trees. Having done so, he determined their
               uses. These t\VO trees, viz. the Cryptomeria and the
               Camphor-tree, were to be made into floating riches; 7 the
               Thuya was to be used as timber for building fair palaces; S
               the Podocarpus was to form receptacles in which the
               visible race of man was to be laid in secluded burial-places.
               For their food he \vell sowed and made to gro\v all the
               eight)" kinds of fruit.
                  Now the children of Sosa no wo no ~likoto ,vere named
               Iso-takeru no Mikoto, with Oho-ya !I tSll hime, his younger

          1  Corea.           ;l The meritorious God.           3 Kii or Ki 111eans tree.

          4  Shillla usually Ineans island, but in this and other places must be
        rendered ,. region."
          ;. l\ kind of pine.                  6 Maki, a kind of pine.

          i Ships.               ~ Or Shinto shrines.          \) (;reat-house.
                     THE AGE OF THE GODS.                               59
      sister, and next Tsuma I-tsu-hime no Mikoto. All these
      three Deities also dispersed well the seeds of trees, and
      forthwith crossed over to the Land of Kir.
         Thereafter · Sosa no wo no Mikoto dwelt on the Peak of I. 59.
       Kuma-nari,2 and eventually entered the Nether Land."
         In one writing it is said :-" Oho-kuni-nushi 3 no Kami
      is also called Oho-mono-nushi no Kami,4 or else Kuni-
      dzukuri Oho-na-mochi r» no Mikoto, or again Ashi-hara
      no Shiko-wo,6 or Ya-chi-hoko 7 n<> Kami, or Oho-kuni-
      dama 8 no Kami, or Utsushi-kuni-dama 9 no Kami. His
      children were in all one hundred and eighty-one Deities.
         Now Oho-na-mochi no Mikoto and Sukuna-bikona no
      Mikoto, with united strength and one heart, constructed
      this sub-celestial world. Then, for the sake of the visible
      race of man as well as for beasts, they determined the
      method of healing diseases. They also, in order to do
      away with the calamities of birds, beasts, and creeping
      things, established means for their prevention and control. lO

  1  \Vritten with a Chinese character which means nail or hoof.
  2  Probably Mount Kumano in Idzumo. It adjoins the Suga mentioned
above as the residence of Sosa no woo See Index-Kuma-nari.
  3 Great-country-master.                       4 Great-thing-master.

  5 Country-make great-name-possessor.

   6 The ugly male of the reed-plain.          i Eight thousand spears.
   s Great-country-jewel.                       9 Apparent-country-jewel.

  10 Calamities (wazahahi) are defined by Hirata as injuries which come

to us from the unseen world.
   By beasts wild beasts are meant. In addition to the real injuries caused
by them, we must remember that in Japan all manner of iluaginary effects
are attributed to the enchantlnents of foxes and badgers.
   One of the Norito (rituals) mentions calamities of birds flying in by the
smoke-hole in the roof-perhaps because their droppings polluted the
food which was being cooked.
   The term hafu mushi (creeping things) includes both insects and reptiles.
The stings of wasps, centipedes, and vipers· are doubtless meant. The
ancient Japanese houses, slight structures often built in pits, would be
especially obnoxious to such calamities. Possibly also the injury to the
crops and to domestic animals by insects and snakes may be referred to.
It should be remembered, too, that the Japanese suppose many ailments,
such as toothache and children's convulsions, to be owing to mushi, and
these are no doubt to be included in the hafu mushi no wazahahi. Hirata
remarks that it is the opinion of the men of the Western Ocean that by
         60                             NIHONGI.

              The people enjoy the protection of these universally until
              the present day.
                 Before this Oho-na-mochi no Mikoto spake to Sukuna-
              bikona no Mikoto, and said :-' May we not say that the
              country which we have made is well made?' Sukuna-
              bikona no Mikoto answered and said :-' In some parts it
              is complete and in others it is incomplete.'          This
              conversation had doubtless a mysterious purport.
I. 60.           Thereafter Sukuna-bikona no :NIikoto went to Cape
              Kumano,t and eventually proceeded to the Everlasting
              Land. 2
                 Another version is that he went to the island of Aha,
              where he climbed up a millet-stalk, and was thereupon
              jerked off, and went to the Everlasting Land.
                 After this, wherever there was in the land a part which
              was imperfect, Oho-na-mochi no Kami visited it by' him-
              self, and succeeded in repairing it. Coming at last to the
              province of Idzumo, he spake, and said :-' This Central
              Land of Reed-plains had been always waste and wild.
              The very rocks, trees and herbs were all given to violence.
              But I have now reduced them to submission, and there is
              none that is not compliant.' Therefore he said finally:-
              'It is I, and I alone, who now govern this Land. Is

         eXan11nJng ring\vorm (called in Japanese ta~lnushi, i.e. rice-field insect),
         itch and other diseases under a Inicroscope, it \vould appear that they are
         due to the presence of exceedingly small insects. It \vould also appear,
         he says, from a work recently published, that the human body is full of such
         animalcules.
            The words "prevention and control" are rendered in the interlinear
         kana by Majinahi, i.e. \vitchcraft, including incantations, etc. Possibly
         the author had in mind the Oho-harahi, which deprecates "calan1ities of
         creeping things" and of "high birds." Here is a modern n1ajinahi
         directed against hafu mushi. If you wish to keep your house free from
         ants, all you have to do is to put up a notice at the place \vhere they
         COille in, " Admittance, one cash each person." The econolnical ant goes
         no further.
            Yamada in his dictionary defines majinahi as "the keeping off of
          calamity by the aid of the supernatural power of Gods and IJuddhas."
            1 In Idzull1o.

            2 Toko-yo no kuni.     The Japanese scholar Ara\vi identifies this with
          a province in the East of Japan, now called Hitachi.
                    THE AGE OF THE GODS.                               61

      there perchance anyone who could join with me In
      governing the world?' Upan this a Divine radiance
      illuminated the sea, and of a sudden there was something
      which floated towards him and said :-' \Vere I not here,
      how couldst thou subdue this Land? It is because I am
      here that thou hast been enabled to accomplish this
      mighty undertaking.'       Then Oho-na-mochi no Kami
      inquired, saying :-' Then who art thou?' It replied and
      said :-' I am thy guardian spirit, the wondrous spirit.' 1. 6,.
      Then said Oho-na-mochi no Kami :-' True, I know there-
      fore that thou art my guardian spirit, the wondrous spirit.
      Where dost thou now wish to dwell?' The spirit
      answered and said :-' I wish to dwell on Mount Mimoro,
      in the province of Yamato.' Accordingly he built a
      shrine in that place and made the spirit to go and dwell
      there. This is the God of Oho-miwa.
         The children of this Deity were the Kimi of Kamo
      and of Oho-miwa; and also Hime-tatara 2 I-sllzu-hime no I. 62.
      Mikoto.
         Another version is that Koto-shiro-nushi no Kami, having
      become transfornled into an eight-fathom bear-sea-monster,:i


  1  Descendants are here meant. Kilni is silnply Lord.
  ~ Tatara    is said to be the name of a plant. Isuzu (fifty bells) is the
name of the site of the Inner Shrine at Ise.
   3 Sea-lnonster is in Japanese wani.       I t is written with a Chinese
character \vhich means, properly, crocodile, but that n1eaning is inadmis-
sible in these old legends, as the Japanese who originated them can have
kno\\'n nothing of this animal. The wani, too, inhabits the sea and not
rivers, and is plainly a mythical creature.
    Satow and Anderson have noted that the wani is usually represented
in art as a dragon, and Toyo-tama-hime (see Index), who in one version
of the legend changes into a wani, as her true form, at the moment of
child-birth, according to another changes into a dragon. No\v Toyo-
tama-hime ,vas the daughter of the God of the Sea. This suggests that
the latter is one of the Dragon-Kings familiar to Chinese (see Mayers'
l\'lanual, p. 142) and Corean fable who inhabit splendid palaces at the
bottt>m of the sea. It is unnecessary here to follow the Dragon-Kings
into Indian myth, where they appear under the form of the Naga Radja or
Cobra-Kiqgs. The reader who wishes to do so should consult Anderson's
British Museum Catalogue, p. 50. Chamberlain has remarked that "the
 whole story of the Sea-God's palace has a Chinese ring about it, and the
         62                                NIHONGI.

               had intercourse \vith Mizo-kuhi 1 hime of the island
               of Mishima (some call her Tama-kushi-hime), and
               had by her a child named Hime-tatara I-suzu-hime no
               Mikoto, who became the Empress of the Emperor Kami-
               Yamato Ihare-biko Hohodemi. 2
                 Before this time, when Oho-na-mochi no Kami was
               pacifying the land, he went to W obama in Isasa, ill the
               province of Idzumo. He was just having some food
               and drink, when of a sudden there was heard a human
               voice from the surface of the sea. He was astonished, but
               on seeking for it there was nothing at all to be seen.
               After a while a dwarf appeared, who had made a boat of
               the rind of a kagami 3 and clothing of the feathers of a
I. 63.         wren. 4 He came floating towards him on the tide, and
               Oho-na-mochi no Mikoto taking him up, placed 11im on
               the palm of his hand. He was playing with him, ,vhen
               the dwarf leaped up, and bit hinl on the cheek. He
               wondered at his appearance, and sent a messenger to
               report the matter to the Gods of Heaven. Now when
               Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto heard this, he said :-' The
               children whom I have produced number in all one thou-

          cassia-tree Inentioned in it is certainly Chinese." Is it possible that
          ,vani is for the Corean ,vang-i, i.e. "the King," i being the Corean
          definite particle, as in zeni, fUllli, yagi, and other Chinese ,vords ,vhich
         reached Japan via Corea? We have the sanle change of 1zg into 11 in the
         nalne of the Corean who taught Chinese to the Japanese Prince Ilnperial in
          Ojin Tenno's reign. It is Wang-in in Corean, but ,vas pronounced Wani
         by the Japanese. Wani occurs several tiules as a proper nalne in the
         "Nihongi." Bear (in Japanese kuma) is no doubt an epithet indicating
          size, as in kuma-bachi, bear-bee or bear-,vasp, i.e. a hornet; kUlna-gera, a
         large kind of wood-peeker, etc.
            1 Mizo-kuhi means ,vater-channel pile.      Talna-kushi is je\\Tel-co111b.
            ~ Otherwise called Jimmu Tenno. See belo\v, beginning of Book III.
             a Some plant, very likely having gourd-shaped fruit.     Vide Ch. K., p. 85.
            4 The" Kojiki" says goose skins.        The wren ,vas no doubt substituted
         as more in accordance \vith the dwarfish stature of Sukuna-bikona.
            Dr. Schlegel in his "Problemes Geographiques" Inentions a Chinese
         notice of a Han-ming-kuo, the inhabitants of \vhich se\v together skins
         of birds for clothing. He identifies this country WIth the Kuriles, ,vhere
         modern travellers have found this to be the custoln. The bird "Those
         skins are thus used is the Procellaria gracilis' (petrel).
                   1"HE AGE OF THE GODS.                             12

    sand and five hundred. Amongst them one \vas very
    wicked, and would not yield compliance to my instructions.
    He slipped through between my fingers and fell. This
    must be that child, let him be loved and nurtured.' This
    was no other than Sukuna-bikona no Mikoto." 1

   1 Sukuna-bikona is    a popular God at the present day. Hirata has
devoted two volumes (the" Shidzu no ihaya") to a glorification of him as
the inventor of medicine and of the art of bre\ving sake under the nalne
of Kushi no Kami. The" Kojiki " relates his legend somewhat differently.
See Ch. K., p. 85. Sukuna means small (in modern Japanese fe\v) and
bikona is honorific.
   Hirata identifies Sukuna-bikona \vith Yebisu and Oho-na-n10chi \"ith
Daikoku. See Anderson's B. M. Catalogue, p. 36. All these identifica-
tions, of which Hirata is profuse, are sOlnewhat problematical.
                                   BOOK II.
                            THE AGE OF THE GODS.


                                     PART    II.

      MAS.A-'{A-A-KATSU-KATSU-HAYA-HI         AMA NO     OSHI-HO-MI-MI      NO
      MIKOTO, the     son of Ama-terasu no Oho-kami, took to wife
       Taku.. hata'-chi-chi-hime, daughter of Taka-mi-musubi no
       Mikoto. A child was born to them nanled Ama-tsu-hiko-hiko-
       ho-no-ninigi no Mikoto. 2 Therefore his august grandparent,
       Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto, treated him with special affection,
       and nurtured him with great regard. Eventually he desired
       to establish his august grandchild Ama-tsu-hiko-ho-ho-ninigi
       no lVlikoto as the Lord of the Central Land of Reed-Plains.
       But in that Land there were numerous Deities which shone
       with a lustre like that of fireflies, and evil Deities which buzzed
II. 2. like flies. There were also trees and herbs all of which could
       speak. Therefore Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto assembled all
       the eighty Gods, and inquired of them, saying :-" I desire to
       have the evil Gods of the Central Land of Reed-Plains expelled
       and subdued. Whom is it meet that we should send for this
       purpose? I pray you, all ye Gods, conceal not your opinion."
       They all said :-" Ama-no-ho-hi no Mikoto is the most heroic
       among the Gods. Ought not he to be tried? "
          Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto thereupon complied with the
       general advice, and made Ama-no-ho-hi no Mikoto to go and
      subdue them.      This Deity, however, curried favour with Oho-
      na-mochi no Mikoto, and three years passed without his
      making any report. Therefore his son Oho-se-ihi no Mikuma
      no ushi ~ (also called Take 4- mikuma no ushi) was sent.
        1 Taku-hata, paper-mulberry 100111 (cloth).
        2 The interpretation of this nan1e is doubtful. See Ch. K., p. 106.
       3 Great-husband-boiled-rice-of-Mikuma of ll1aster.
       .. Take, brave, is merely a honorific. It is prefixed to several names of
      Deities..
                      TIlE AGE OF THE GODS.                                  12

 He, too, yielded compliance to his father, and never made II. 3.
any report. Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto therefore again
summoned together all the Gods and inquired of them who
should be sent. They all said :-" Ame-waka-hiko, l son of
Anle no Kuni-dama.~ He is a valorous person. Let him be
tried.'~ Hereupon Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto gave Arne-waka-
hiko a heavenly deer-bow and heavenly feathered arrows, and
so despatched him. This God also was disloyal, and as soon
as he arrived took to wife Shita-teru-hime,3 the daughter of
Utsushi-kuni-dama 4 (also called Taka-h£me or Waka-kunl-
dama). Accordingly he remained, and said :-" I, too, wish to
govern the Central Land of Reed-Plains." He never reported
the result of his mission. At this time, Taka-mi-musubi no
Mikoto, wondering why he was so long in coming and making
his report, sent the pheasant Na-naki 5 to observe. The
pheasant flew down and perched on the top of a many-branched
cassia-tree which grew before Ame-waka-hiko's gate. Now
Ama-no Sagu-me 6 saw this and told Ame-waka-hiko, saying:- II· 4·
" A strange bird has come and is perched on the top of the cassia-
tree." Then Ame-waka-hiko took the heavenly deer-bow and
the heavenly feathered arrows which had been given him by
Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto, and shot the pheasant, so that it
died. The arrow having passed through the pheasant's breast,
carne before where Taka-mi-musubi no Kami was sitting. Then
Taka-mi-musubi no Kami seeing this arrow, said :-" This
arrow I formerly gave to Ame-waka-hiko. It is stained with
blood, it may be because he has been fighting with the Earthly
Deities." Thereupon Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto took up the
arrow and flung it back do\vn (to earth). This arrow, when it

  1 Heaven-yaung-prince.                    2 Heaven-of-country-jewel.

  3 Lower-shine-princess.                    " Real-country-jewel.
  & Na-naki.   This word is written here as if the meaning were "nameless.:'
But in the" Kojiki " (see Ch. K., p. 95), characters are used ,vhich give it the
sense of name-crying, i.e. calling out its own name. The old Japanese for
pheasant is kigishi or kigisu. COlnparing this with uguhisu (the Japanese
nightingale), kakesu (the jay), kirigirisu (the grasshopper), karasu (the
crow), and hototogisu (a kind of cuckoo), it becomes evident that kigisu i~ an
onon1atopoetic ,vord. Su is for suru, to do. The Corean for a pheasant is
kiong, no doubt also an onomatope.
  6 Heavenly-spying-woman.
     66                               NIHONGI.

       fell, hit Ame-\vaka-hiko on the top of his breast. At this time
       Ame-waka-hiko was lying down after the feast of first-fruits,
       and ,vhen hit by the arrow died immediately. This was the
       origin of the general saying, " Fear a returning arro\v."
          The sound of the weeping and mourning of Ame-waka-hiko's
II. 5. wife Shita.. teru-hime reached Heaven. At this time, Arne no
       Kuni-dama, hearing the voice of her crying, straightway knew
       that her husband, -,-\me-waka-hiko, was dead, and sent down a
       swift ,vind to bring the body up to Heaven. Forthwith a
       mortuary house ,vas made, in which it was temporarily de-
       posited.      The river-geese were made the head-hanging
       bearers and broom-bearers.
                One version is :-" The barn-door fowls were made head-
              hanging bearers, and the river-geese were made broom-
              bearers."
          The sparro\vs were made pounding-women.
                One version is :-" The river-geese were made head-hang-
              ing bearers and also broom-bearers, the kingfisher was made
              the representative of the deceased, the sparrows were made
              the pounding-women, and the wrens the mourners. Alto-
II. 6.       'gether the assembled birds were entrusted with the matter."
          f~or eight days and eight nights they wept and sang dirges. 1


       1  We have here a glilnpse of the ancient Japanese funeral cerelnonies.
        " Head-hanging bearers" is a literal translation of the Chinese characters.
     The interlinear Kana renders them by the obsolete ,vord kisari-machi, of
     obscure meaning. An ancient commentator says that these were persons
     \vho accompanied the funeral, bearing on their heads food for the dead,
     ,vhich is perhaps correct. The brooms were probably for s\\feeping the road
     before the procession. The pounding-women pounded the rice for the guests,
     and perhaps also for the offerings to the deceased. By mourners are meant
     paid lTIOUrners.
        To these Hirata adds {roln old books the wata-dzukuri or tree-fibre carders,
     the kites (the fibre being to fill up the vacant space in the coffin), and the
     fleshers (for food offered to the deceased), an office given to the crow.
     Compare also Ch. K., p. 97-
        The student of folk-lore will not think it frivolous of me to cite here the
     English story of the Death and Burial of Cock Robin, \vhere the birds
     officiate in various capacities at a funeral.
        "Sang dirges." Hirata condemns this as a Chinese importation. He
     prefers the "Kojiki" version, which says that "they made merry," and
     explains that this was with the object of recalling the dead to life, perhaps in
                     THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                  12

   Before this, when Ame-waka-hiko was in the Central Land of
Reed-Plains, he was on terms of friendship with Aji-suki I-taka-
hiko-ne no Kami. Therefore Aji-suki-taka-hiko-ne no Kami
ascended to Heaven and offered condolence on his decease.
Now this God \vas exactly like in appearance to Ame-waka-
hiko when he ,vas alive, and therefore Ame-waka-hiko's parents,
relations, \\~ife, and children all said :-" Our Lord is still alive,"
and clung to his garments and to his girdle, partly rejoiced
and partly distracted. Then Aji-suki-taka-hiko-ne no Kami
became flushed with anger and said :-" The way of friends is
such that it is right that mutual condolence should be made.
Therefore I have not been daunted by the pollution, but have
come from afar to make mourning. Why then should I be
mistaken for a dead person?" So he drew his sword, Oho-ha-
kari,2 which he had in his girdle, and cut down the mortuary
house, which fell to earth and became a mountain. It is now
in the province of Mino, by the upper waters of the River
Ayumi. This is the mountain of Moyama (mourning moun. II. 7.
tain). This is why people take care not to mistake a living for
a dead person.
   After this, Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto again assembled all
the Gods that they might select S0me one to send to the Central
Land of Reed-Plains. They all said :-" It will be well to send
Futsu-nushi 3 no !{ami, son of Iha-tsutsu no wo" and Iha-tsutsu
no me, the children of Iha-saku-ne-saku & no Kami."

iUlitation of the Gods dancing and making ll1erry in order to entice the Sun-
Goddess from her rock-cave. Compare the following passage from a
Chinese History of the Han (A.D. 25-220) Dynasty.
   In Japan" Mourning lasts for Saine ten days only, during which tilne the
nlembers of the family \veep and lament, \\'hilst their friends cOlne singing,
dancing and making nlusic."
   The mortuary house ,vas required for the temporary disposal of the
dead, ,vhile the sepulchral lnound ,vith its megalithic chamber was being
constructed. Vide Index-Misasagi.
   ] No satisfactory explanation of this name.         2 Great-leaf-mo\\Ter.

  3 Futsu is explained by Hirata as an onomatopoetic word like the modern
futtsuri for the abrupt snapping sound produced when anything is cleanly
cut or broken off. Nushi lneans master.
  "Iha.. tsutsu. Iha is rock, tsutsu probably a honorific==elder. Wo is male;
Ine, female.
   3 Iha.saku means rock-split ; ne-saku, root-split.
     68                                NIHONGI.

          Now there were certain Gods dwelling in the Rock-cave of
       Heaven, viz. Mika no Ha:ya-hi l no Kami, son of Idzu no wo-
       bashiri 2no Kami, Hi no Raya-hi no Kami, son of Mika no Ha)Wa-
       hi no Kami, and Take-mika-dzuchi no Kami, 3 son ofHi no Haya-hi
       no Kami. The latter God came forward and said :-" Is Futsu-
       nushi no Kami alone to be reckoned a hero? And am I not a
       hero?" His ,vords were animated bJ' a spirit of indignation. He
       was therefore associated with Futsu-nushi no Kami and made to
       subdue the Central Land of Reed-Plains. The t,vo Gods there-
       upon descended an<l arrived at the Little Shore 4 of Itasa, ill the
       Land of Idzumo. Then they' dre,\'" their ten-span swords, and
       stuck them upside down in the earth, and sitting on their
       points questioned Oho-na-mochi no Kami, ~aying :-" Taka-mi-
       musubi no Mikoto wishes to send down his August Grandchild
       to preside over this country as its Lord. He has therefore
       sent us t"lO Gods to clear out and pacify it. 'Vhat is th)'" inten-
       tion? Wilt thou stand aside or no?" Then Oho-na-mochi
       no Kami answered and said :-" I must ask my son before I
       reply to you." At this time his son Koto-shiro-nushi no Kami
       was absent on an excursion to Cape Miho in the Land of
       Idzumo, where he was amusing himself by angling for fish.
II. 8.         Some say':-" He was amusing himself by catching birds."
          lIe therefore took the nlany-handed boat of Kumano,
               [Another name is the Heavenly' Pigeon-boat.]
       and placing on board of it his messenger, Inase-hagi," he de-
       spatched him, and announced to Koto-shiro-nushi no Kan1i the
       declaration of Taka-mi-musubi no I~alni. He also inquired
       what language he should use in ans,ver. N O\V Koto-shiro-
       nushi no Kami spoke to the messenger, and said :-" The
        Heavenly Deit)7 has now addressed us this inquiry,.6 M)y father


         1 Mika is explained by Hirata as the saine as ika, terrible; haya-hi Ineans

      s\vift SUD.
         2 Idzu DO \vo-bashiri, lit. dread-of-male-run.

         3 Take-mika.. dzuchi.   Take is brave. Mika-dzllchi is identified \vith ika-
      dzuchi, thunder.
         " Wobalna.
         5 Hirata points out the appropriateness of this n,UllC, ,,"hich Inean~ " '" cs
      or no ?-shanks," to a messenger sent to ask a question.
         (i The Chinese character indicates a communication fr0111 an Eillperor.
                     1"HE AGE OF THE GODS.                                  12

ought respectfully to withdraw, nor will I make any opposition."
So he made in the sea an eight-fold fence of green branches, and
stepping on the bo\v of the boat, went off. 1 The messenger re-
turned and reported the result of his mission. Then Oho-na-
mochi no Kami said to the two Gods, in accordance with the
words of his son :-" My son, on whom I rely, has already
departed. I, too, will depart. If I were to make resistance all
the Gods of this Land \vould certainly resist also. But as I
no\v respectfully withdraw, who else will be so bold as to refuse
submission?" So he took the broad spear which he had used
as a staff when he was pacifying the land and gave it to the
t\VO Gods, saying :-" By means of this spear I was at last
successful. If the Heavenly Grandchild will use this spear to II. 9.
rule the land, he \viII undoubtedly subdue it to tranquillity. I
am now about to \vithdra\v to the concealment of the short-of-a-
hundred ~-eighty road-windings." 3 Having said these words, he
at length became concealed. 4 Thereupon the two Gods put to
death all the rebellious spirits and Deities.
        One version says :-" The two Gods at length put to
     death the malignant Deities and the tribes of herbs, trees and
     rocks. When all had been subdued, the only one who re-
     fused submission was the Star-God Kagase-wo. ~ There-

     " \\~ent off~' is the saIne character as is translated ",,-ithdra\v" above.
Hirata understands this of his death. The ,,,hole episode is related quite
differently in the " Kojiki.~' l"ride eh. K., p. 101.
  Enclosures of bamboo are used at the present day to trap fishes, but it is
not very clear \vhy one is introduced here.
  2 A mere epithet or pillo\v-\vord (lnakura-kotoba) of eighty.

  3 The eighty-road-\vindings are put for a long journey, i.e. to VOlni or

Hades, or rather for Y0111i itself.
   4 i.e. died.

   ~ Kagase-\\To.     \Vo Ineans Inale. Kaga is obviously connected \\-ith
kagayaku, to shine. This is the only Star-God Inentioned in Japanese Inyth,
and it may be noted that little honour is shown hiln. He is described as a
conquered rebel, and has neither Kami nor Mikoto affixed to his nalne. The
only stars mentioned in the" Kojiki" or "l'J"ihongi" are Venus, the Pleiades,
and the \\'cayer or Star a Lyrae, the latter being connected \vith a Chinese
legend.
   The Weayer.God is literally, if \ve follo",- the Chinese character, the God
of Japanese striped stuffs. The interlinear "Kana" gives Shidzuri or
Shidori, fronl shidzu, cloth, and ori, \"eave, which is doubtless correct.
       70                               NIHONGI.

             fore they sent the 'Veaver-God Take-lla-dzuchi no Mikoto
             also, upon which he rendered submission. The two Gods
             therefore ascended to Heaven."
           Ultimately they reported the result of their mission.
           Then Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto took the coverlet which ,yas
        on his true couch, and casting it oyer his August Grandchild~
        Amatsu-hiko-hiko-ho-ninigi no Mikoto, made him to descend.
        So the August Grandchild left his Heavenl)~ Rock-seat, and ,,·ith
        an a,vful 1 path-cleaving, clove his ,va)· through the eight-fold
        clouds of Heaven, and descended on the Peak of Takachiho of
II. 10. So ~ in Hiuga.
           After this the manner of the progress of the August Grandchild
        \vas as follows :-From the Floating Bridge of Heaven on the
        twin summits of Kushibi, he took his stand on a level part of
        the floating sand-bank. Then he traversed the desert land of
        Sojishi from the Hill of Hita\yo in his search for a countr)·,
        until he came to Cape Kasasa, in Ata-no-nagayra. A certain
        man of that land appeared and gave his name as Koto-katsu-
        kuni-katsu Nagasa. 3 The August Grandchild inquired of him,
II. II. sa~ying :-" Is there a country, or not? '" He answered, and said:
        - " There is here a country. I pra)· thee roam through it at
        th.y pleasure." The August Grandchild therefore went there
        and took up his abode. N ow there ,vas a fair maid in that land
        whose name was Ka.. ashi.. tsu-hime.
                [Also called Kami Ata-tsu-hinle or Ko no hana no saku-
             ya-hime. 4 J


      Take-ha-dzuchi is brave-leaf-elder. It is not clear that this Weaver-God is
      the same as the Weaver star.
          t The interlinear gloss has idzu, an obsolete ,,·ord ,,·hich nleans a,,~ful,

      holy, sacred. It is, I would suggest, the same root which appears in the name
      of the province Idzu-mo and in Idzu-shi in Tajima, also a seat ofShinto \\'or..
      ship. Mo means quarter, as in yomo, the fOUf quarters, everywhere, and shi
      is for ishi, stone. See Index-Idzu.
         2 It is this word which forms the second part of Kumaso, the general

      name of the tribes \vhich inhabited the south of Kiushiu.
         :I Thing-excel-country-excel.     Long-narro\v.
         4 These names mean respectively Deer-reed..of..princess, Deity (or upper)

      Ata-or-princess and Tree-of..flo\\·er-of-blossom..princess, i.e. blossoming like
      the flowers of the trees. The last name is that by \vhich she is called in the
      " Kojiki " (7lZaC eh. K., p. I 15), and is the one best kno\vn.
                      THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                   12

  The i\.ugust Grandchild inquired of this fair maid, saying:-
" ~Those daughter art thou?" She ans\vered and said :-" Thy
handmaiden I is the child of a Heavenly Deity by his marriage
with Oho-yama-tsu-mi Kami."
  The August Grandchild accordingly favoured 2 her, \,rhere-
upon in one night she became pregnant. But the August Grand-
child was slow to believe this, and said :-" Heavenly Deity
though I am, how could I cause anyone to become pregnant in
the space of one night? That which thou hast in thy bosom is
assuredly not my child." Therefore Ka-ashi-tsu-hime was
wroth. She prepared a doorless 3 muro -I (called utsulnuro), and


    1 The use of the character Ineaning concubine as a pronoun of the first

 person fenl. is a Chinese idiom. The interlinear Kana YerSiOll has yakko,
 i.e. slave. Oho-yama-tsu..mi means the Great-Inountain-body. Possibly it
should be taken here as a common noun, a mountain Deity.
    2 i.e. lnarried her.

    3 I t appears froin the ,,' Kojiki "that after going in she plastered up the

 entrance.
    4 The character ~ which in Chinese lneans a house, a chanlber, is, in

 the older Japanese literature, generally, if not in\-ariably, used to represent
 the Japanese word muro. Another character used for this purpose is        ii,  a
cellar. The muro is distinguished from the ihe, or ordinary dwelling. What
 \vas the Inuro? This ternl is no\vadays applied to a gardener's fOfcing-
house, ,vhich in Japan consists of a pit four or fi'"e feet deep and roofed over.
 Hi-muro n1eans an ice-house. If the ice-houses in Japan (see dra\ving in
"San-sai-dzu-ye," IV., 19), so denolninated, reselnble those \vhich I have seen
at Yang-..h\\,a-chin in Corea, they ,vere pits sunk several feet below the sur-
face of the ground and covered \vith a heavy thatched roof. At the foot of
 Mount Ohoyama there \\raS to be seen, sOlne years ago, a large rectangular
pit, three or four feet in depth, with a thatched roof sloping to the ground,
and no \valls, \vhich was occupied as a d \yelling by the pilgrinls to that
mountain. 'There are also pits in Corea covered \\"ith thatch or strong oil-
paper, ,vhich are used by the poorest classes as shelters. These are called
unl, or um-mak. Pit..d\\·ellers are also tuentioned in the old Chinese litera-
ture. The references to the lnuro in the H Kojiki" and" Nihongi " sho,v
that the lnuro of those days had a similar character. \Ve read of Tsuchi-
gUluo (earth-hiders, see Index) living in llluro, of a lnuro being dug, and of
steps (do"'n) to a Inuro. that they \vere sonletimes of considerable size is
shown by the legend of Jimmu Tenno's reign, which speaks of 160 persons
being in a muro at the same time. The pit ,vas (at least in sonle cases) not
simply roofed over, but contained a house \vith a \\'ooden franle lashed
together with cords of a creeping vine (dolichos), the ,,"aIls having sedges or
reeds for laths, and plastered ,vith a lnixture of grass and clay. The roof ,vas
                                                                      G
12                                 NIHONGI.

entering, dwelt therein. Then she made a solemn declaration,
saying :-" If that which is in my bosom is not the offspring of
the Heavenly Grandchild, it will assuredly be destroyed by fire,
but if it is really the offspring of the Heavenly Grandchild, fire

 thatched with reeds. The muro had a door opening in,vards, and contained
 a raised platform for sleeping on. A dwelling closely ans,vering this
 description was actually unearthed near Akita in De,,·a in 1807.
    Muro were used in ancient times by the higher as \vell as by the poorest
 classes. Sosa no wo no Mikoto is said by the Idzumo Fudoki to have made
 himself a inuro, and Jitumu Tenno's son is represented as sleeping in a great
 muro. In modern tilnes ll1uro sometimes means simply chalnber.
    SOUle writers confound the muro with the ihaya. So far as I am aware,
 the latter is used only of caverns in the rock, or of the artificial megalithic
 chambers contained in sepulchral mounds.
    Mr. J. Milne, in an extrenlely interesting paper on the pit-d\vellers of Yezo,
 read before the Asiatic Society of Japan in 1882, argues that certain pits
 discovered by him in large numbers in the islands of Yezo and Itorup were
 the dwellings of a pre-Aino race, \vhose Dlodern representatives are to be
found amongst the Kurilsky or their neighbours in Kamschatka and Sagha..
 lin. To these he gives the name of Koro·pok-guru, follo\ving an Aino tradi..
 tion communicated to him by Mr. Batchelor.
    On the other hand, I am informed by Baron A. VOll Siebold, \vho visited
 several of these groups of pits in Kusiro and the Kurile Islands, that,--
    I. Their appearance is, in his opinion, not consonant with the great
 antiquity assigned to thetn by !\tIr. Milne's theory. It \vas especially notice..
 able that no large trees or even deep-rooted brush\\'ood ,vere found growing
 in or between the square pits.
    2. They are arranged in a regular order 1110re suggestive of a lllilitary en..
 campment than of the abodes of a tribe of savages. They are all of the same
 size, except a fe\\- larger ones, ,vhich may bave been occupied by officers.
An earthwork near one of thenl was also suggestive of a Inilitary occupation.
    3. The pits were carefully dug and found to contain fragments of burned
wood, unglazed pottery, and \vhat is more remarkable, a slnall Japanese
 sword (tanto) of comparatively modern Inanufacture.
    4. The Jnost important evidence, ho\vever, is the fact that the sites of
these pits correspond in all the cases which Baron yon Siebold ,vas able to
examine with those of the nlilitary encampnlents established in Vezo and the
 Kllriles by the Japanese Government about the beginning of the present
century as a defence against the Russians. These encanlpnlents are marked
on a Japanese Inap presented to Ph. Fr. von Siebold (the father) by a Court
astronomer nalned Mogami Toknai, and published in Siebold's Atlas. The
inference is obvious. In fact pit-dwelling in northern climates affords no
indication of race. I t has been seen that Chinese, Japanese, and Coreans
ll1ay all be pit-d,vellers on occasion, and the practice is by no means confined
to this part of the world.
                     THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                  73
cannot harm it." So she set fire to the n1uro. The child
which \vas born from the extremity of the smoke which first
arose was called Ho no Susori no Mikoto (he u'as the anCtstor
of tIlt Hayato); next the child which was born when she drew
back and remained away from the heat was called Hiko-ho-ho-
delni no Mikoto; the child which was next born was called Ho
no akari no Mikoto (he was the ancestoy of the Wollari no
.J~luraj·l)--in all three children. 1                               II. 12.
   A long time after, Ama-tsu-hiko hiko-ho-no-ninigi no l\1ikoto
died, and \vas buried in the Misasagi 2 of Hiuga no ye in
Tsukushi.
         In one writing it is said :-" Ama-terasu no Oho-kami
      gave command unto Ame-waka-hiko, saying :-' The
      Central Land of Reed-Plains is a region which it is for my
      child to rule over. Considering, however, that there are
      there certain rebellious, violent and wicked Deities, do thou
      therefore go first and subdue it.' Accordingly she gave him
      the Heavenly deer-bo\v and the Heavenly true-deer-arrows,
      and so despatched him. Ame-waka-hiko, having received
      this command, went down and forthwith married many
      daughters of the Earthly Deities. Eight years passed, during
      which he made no report of his mission. Therefore Ama-
     terasu-no Oho-kami summoned Omohi-kane no Kami (the
      Thought-combiner) and inquired the reason why he did not
      come. Now the Thought-combining Deity reflected and in-
      formed her, saying :-' It will be well to send the pheasant
     to inquire into this.' Hereupon, in accordance with this
      God's device, the pheasant was caused to go and spy out
     the reason. The pheasant flew down and perched on the II. 13·
     top of a many'-branched cassia-tree before Ame-waka-hiko's


   1 The" Kojiki;' gives these nalnes differently.   Ho no akari Ineans fire-
light. The other t\VO are of doubtful interpretation. }lerhaps Susori is from
the word suso, skirt, and ho-ho-de may luean "go out froln flames." This
passage shows that the muro was used as an ubu-ya or parturition-house. It
was the euston1 in ancient Japan for women to retire for their confinement to
a telnporary hut constructed for the purpose. SatO\\9 and Dickins found this
practice still in vogue in the Island of Hachijo when they visited it in 1878.
See" J. A. S. T.,~' yi. 3.
   ~ See Index.
         74                           N IH()l\GI.
              gate, \vhere it nttered a Cf)', saying :-' An1a-\vaka-hiko !
              \vherefore for the space of eight )-ears hast thou still not
              made a report of thy mission?' N 0\\- a certain Earthly
              Goddess, named Ama-no-sagu-nle, sa\,- the pheasant, and
              said :-' A bird of evil cr)~ is sitting on the top of this tree.
              It \yill be well to shoot it and kill it.' So Ame-\vaka-hiko
              took the Heavenly deer-bo\'" and the Heayenl)" true deer-
              arro\v given him by the Heayenl)- Deit)· and shot it, upon
              \vhich the arrow \vent throug]1 the pheasant's breast, and
              finally reached the place \vhere the Heuyenly' Deity ,vas.
              N 0\'" the Heavenl~y Deity seeing the arro\v, said :-' This
              arro\v I formerly gave to Ame-"-aka-hiko. 'Vhy' has it come
              here?' So she took the arro,,-, and pronouncing a curse
              over it, said :-' If it has been shot ,\-ith evil intent, let
              mischief surely come upon An1a-"'aka-hiko; but if it has
              been shot with a tranquil heart, let no harm befall him.'
              So she flung it back. It fell dO"'n and struck Ame-\vaka-
              hiko on the top of the breast, so that he straight\vay died.
              This is the reason Wh)T people at the present day say,
              , Fear a returning arro\v.' No,," Atne-\yaka-hiko's ,vife and
              children came dO\\Tn from Hea,-en and ,,-ent a ,\ta)l' up\,-ards
              taking with them the dead bod)-. Then they made a
              mourning house in Heaven, in ,vllich the)· deposited it and
              lamented over it. Before this An1e-\\"aka-hiko was on
              friendly terms with Aji-suki-taka-hiko-ne no Kami.
              Therefore Aji-suki-taka-hiko-ne no Kami ascended to
               Heaven and condoled \\Tith them on the mourning, lament-
              ing greatly. Now this God had b)l' nature an exact
              resemble_nee to Ame-waka-hiko in appearance. Therefore
              Ame-\vaka-hiko's wife and children, ,,,,hen they sa\v him,
              rejoiced, and said :-' OUf Lord is still alive.' And they
              clung to his robe and to his girdle, and could not be thrust
              away. Now Aji-suki-taka-hiko ne no Kami became angry',
              and said :-' My friend is dead, therefore have I come to
              make condolence. Why then should I be mistaken for a
              dead man?' So he drew his ten-span sword and cut
              down the mourning house, \vhich fell to earth and became
II. 14        a mountain. This is Mo)rama (Mount Mourning) in the
              provirlce of Mino. This is the reason wh)· people dislike
              to be mistaken for a dead person.
                     THE AGE OF l'HE G()DS.                                 75
        No,,' the glory of Aji-suki-taka-hiko ne no Mikoto ,vas so
     effulgent that it illuminated the space of t\'iO hills and two
     valleys, and those assembled for the mourning: celebrated it
     .            .
     In song, sayIng : -
        [Another version is that Aji-suki-taka-hiko-ne no Kami's
     younger sister, Shita-teru-hime, ,vishing to make kno\\Tn to
     the company that it was Aji-suki-taka-hiko ne no Mikoto
     who illuminated the hills and valleys therefore Inade a song,
     saying:-]
                         Like the string of je\\'els
                        Worn on the neck
                        Of the Weaving-maiden,
                        'That d\vells in Heaven-
                         Oh ! the lustre of the jewel::'
                         Flung across t\VO valleys
                        From Aji-suki-taka-hiko.ne ~ I
        Again they sang, saying:-
                        To the side-pool-
                        The side-pool
                        Of the rocky stream
                        Whose narro\vs are crossed
                        By the country \\'enches
                        Afar from Heaven,
                        COlne hither, cOlne hither ~
                        (The \vomen are fair)
                        And spread across thy net
                        In the side-pool
                        Of the rocky strealn.~
      These two poems are in \\,hat is no\\" called a Rustic 3
     measure.

  1 The metre is irregular.  The" Kojiki " version (see eh. K., p. 99) is some-
what different. The Weaving-maiden of Heaven is a Chinese personification
of the Star a Lyrae. See Mayers' "Chinese Manual," p. 97. This affords
some indication of the date of this poem. It must have been written after
the Japanese became falniliar \vith Chinese astronomy.
  2 The metre      is irregular, the text doubtful, and the meaning and
application obscure. I agree \vith the Japanese critics \vho think that this
poem has no business here. The" Kojiki," ,vhich gives the previous one,
omits it.
   Afar from Heaven is a mere epithet (Inakura-kotoba) of the country.
Heaven here stands for the capital.
  S Probably because hina, country or rustic, is a pronlinent word in the

latter of these two poenlS.
          76                          NIHONGI.

                  After this Ama-terasu no Oho-kami united Yorodzu-hata
               Toyo-aki-tsu-hime, the younger sister of Omohi-kane no
               Kami to Masa-ya-a-katsu-katsu-no-haya-hi no Ama no Oshi-
II. 15.        ho-mimi no Mikoto, and making her his consort, caused
               them to descend to the Central Land of Reed-Plains. At
               this time Katsu-no-haY'a-hi no Ama no Oshi-ho-mimi no
               Mikoto stood on the floating bridge of Heaven, and glanc-
               ing downwards, said :-' Is that country tranquillized yet?
               No! it is a tumble-do,,"n land, hideous to look upon.' So
               he ascended, and reported \\rhy he had not gone down.
               Therefore, Ama-terasu no Oho-kami further sent Taka-
               mika-tsuchi no Kami and Futsu-nushi no Rami first to clear
               it. Novv these t\VO Gods went do\\rn and arrived at
               Idzumo, where they inquired of Oho-na-mochi no Mikoto,
               saying: -- 'Wilt thou deliver up this country to the
               Heavenly Deity or not?' He answered and said:-
               , My 5011, Koto-shiro-nushi is at Cape Mitsu for the sport
               of bird-shooting. I will ask him, and then give you an
               answer.' So he sent a messenger to make inquiry, who
               brought answer and said :-' How can we refuse to deliver
               up what is d,emanded by the Heavenly Deity?' Therefore
               Oho-na-mochi no Rami replied to the two Gods' in the
               words of his son. The two Gods thereupon ascended to
               Heaven and reported the result of their mission, saying:-
               , All the Central Land of Reed-Plains is now completely
               tranquillized.' Now Ama-terasu no Oho-kami gave com-
               mand, saying :-' If that be so, I will send down my child.'
               She was about to do so, when in the meantime, an August
               Grandchild was born, whose name was called Ama-tsu-
               hiko-hiko-ho-no-ninigi no Mikoto. Her son represented to
               her that he wished the August Grandchild to be sent
               down in his stead. Therefore Ama-terasu no Oho-kami
               gave to Ama-tsu-hiko-hiko-ho no ninigi no Mikoto the three
               treasures, viz. the curved jewel of Yasaka gem, the eight-
               hand mirror, and the sword Kusanagi, and joined to him
II. 16.        as his attendants Arne no Koyane no Mikoto, the first
               ancestor of the Naka-tomi, Futo-dama no Mikoto, the
               first ancestor of the Imbe, Arne no Uzume no Mikoto, the
               first ancestor of the Sarume; Ishi-kori-dome no rvIikoto,
                                 1   Lit. monkey-eye.
            THE AGE OF TI-IE GODS.                     77
the first ancestor of the mirror-'makers, and Tamaya no
Mikoto, the first ancestor of the je\vel-makers, in all Gods
of five Be. Then she commanded her August Grandchild,
saying :-'This Reed-plain-I5oo-autumns-fair-rice-ear Land
is the region which m~y descendants shall be lords of. Do
thou, my August Grandchild, proceed thither and govern it.
Go! and may prosperity attend thy dynasty, and may it,
like Heaven and Earth, endure for ever.' When he was
about to descend, one, \vho had been sent in advance to
clear the way, returned and said :-' There is one God
who dwells at the eight-crass-roads of Heaven, the length
of whose nose is seven hands, the length of whose back is
more than seven fathoms. Moreover, a light shines from
his mouth and from his posteriors. His eye-balls are like
an eight-hand mirror and have a ruddy glow like the Aka-
kagachi.' Thereupon he sent one of his attendant Deities II. 11-
to go and make inquiry. No\v among all the eighty
myriads of Deities there "vas not one \\tho could confront
him and make inquiry. Therefore he specially commanded
Arne no Uzume, sa)ling :-' Thou art superior to others in
the power of thy looks. Thou hadst better go and ques-
tion him.' So Arne no U zume forthwitll bared her breasts
and, pushing do\vn the band of her garment below her
navel, confronted him ,vith a mocking laugh. Then the
God of the cross-ways asked her, saying: - ' Arne no
Uzume! What meanest thou by this behaviour?' She
answered and said :-' I venture to ask \\tho art thou that
dost thus remain in the road by which the child of Ama-
terasu no Oho-kami is to rnake his progress?' The God
of the cross-\vays answered and said :-' I have heard that
the child of Alna-terasu no Oho-kami is now about to de..
scend, and therefore I have come respectfully to meet and
attend upon him. My name is Saruta-hiko no Oho-kami.' J
Then Arne no U zume again inquired of him, saying:-
'Wilt thou go before me, or shall I go before thee?' He
answered and said :-" I will go before and be his
harbinger.' Arne no Uzume asked again, saying:-
" Whither wilt thou go and whither will the August Grand-
child go?' He ans\vered and said :-' The child of the
             1   In later times a phallic Deity.
          78                         NIHONGI.

               Heavenly Deity \viII proceed to the peak of Kushifuru of
               Takachiho in Hiuga in the Land of Tsukushi, and I will
II. 18.        go to the upper \vaters of the River Isuzu at Sanada in Ise.
               He accordingly said :-' Thou art the person who didst
               discover me. Thou must therefore escort me and com-




                               Saruta-hiko and Uzume.

               plete thy task.' Arne no Uzume returned and reported
               these circumstances. Thereupon the August Grandchild,
               leaving the Heavenly rock-seat, and thrusting apart the
               eight-piled clouds of Heaven, clove his way with an awful
               way-cleaving, and descended from Heaven. Finally, as
                     THE 4\GE OF THE GODS.                                79
      had been arranged, the August Grandchild arrived at the
      peak of Kushifuru of Takachiho in Hiuga, in the land of
      Tsukushi. And Saruta-hiko no Kami forthwith proceeded
      to the upper \vaters of the River Isuzu at Sanada in Ise.
      Arne no Uzume no Mikoto, in accordance with the request
      made by Saruta 1 hiko no Kami, attended upon him.
      N O\V the August Grandchild commanded Arne no U zume
      no Mikoto, saying :-' Let the name of the Deity whom
      thou didst discover be made thy title.' Therefore he con-
      ferred on her the designation of Sarume no Kimi. 2 So
      this was the origin of the male and female Lords of Sarume
      being both styled Kimi." 3
         In one writing it is said :--" The Heavenl)~ Deity sent 11. 19.
      Futsu-nushi no I{ami and Take-mika-tsuchi no Kami to
      tranquillize the Central Land of Reed-Plains. N ow these
      two Gods said :-' In Heaven there is an Evil Deity called
      Ama-tsu-rnika-hoshi, or Arne no Kagase-\vo. We pray
      that this Deity may be executed before we go down to
       make clear the Central Land of Reed-Plains.' At this time
       Iwahi-nushi 4 no K~mi received the designation of Iwahi
       no Ushi. This is the God which now dwells in the land of


  1 ~lonkey-field.                          2 Lord of Sarume.

  3  The" Kojiki " says that it was the fenlales alone who had this title. In
either case, the inference is that it \,tas unusual for women to have such
names or titles, Moto\\~orFs opinion to the contrary notwithstanding.
   The Sarume \\~ere primarily \\"onlen \vho performed comic dances (saru-
mahi or monkey-dances) in honour of the Gods. They ate Inentioned along
\vith the Nakatomi and Inlbe as taking part in the festival of first-fruits and
other Shinto ceremonies. These dances were the origin of the Kagura and
No performances. Another function of the Sarume is that indicated in the
part taken by Uzulne no :\likoto \vhen the Gods enticed the Sun-Goddess
out of her rock-cave. She is there said to have been divinely inspired. This
divine inspiration has always been common in Japan. The inspired person
falls into a trance, or hypnotic state, in which he or she speaks in the
character of some God. Such persons are now known as Miko, defined by
Hepburn as ' a \voman \vho, dancing in a Miya, pretends to hold communica-
tion \vith the Gods and the spirits of the dead,' in short a mediuln. There
are also strolling mediulns, as in England, women of a low class, who pre-
tend to deliver 111essages from deceased friends or relatives. See Lowell's
" Esoteric Shinto," in the" J. A. S. T.," and Index-Inspiration•
   .. Master of religious abstinence or worship.
          80                              NIHONGI.

                Katori in Adzuma. 1 After this the two Deities descended
                and arrived at the Little Shore of Itasa in Idzumo, and
                asked Oho-na-mochi no Kami, saying :-' Wilt thou
                deliver up this country to the Heavenly Deity, or no?'
                He ans\vered and said :-' I suspected that ye two gods were
                coming to my place. Therefore I will not aliow it.' There-
                upon Futsu-nushi no Kami forthwith returned upwards, and
                made his report. Now Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto sent
                the two Gods back again, and commanded Oho-na-mochi
                no Mikoto, saying :-' Having now heard what thou hast
                said, I find that there is profound reason in thy words.
                Therefore again I issue my commands to thee more circum-
                stantially, that is to say:-Let the public matters which
                thou hast charge of be conducted by my grandchild, and
                do thou rule divine affairs. Moreover, if thou wilt dwell
                in the palace of Ama no Hi-sumi,~ I will no,v build it for
                thee. I ,viII take a thousand fathom ropel of the (bark of
                the) paper mulberry, and tie it in 180 knots. As to the
                dimensions of the building of the palace,· its pillars shall
                be high and mass}", and its planks broad and thick. I will
II. 20.         also cultiva.te thy rice-fields for thee, and, for thy provision
                when thou goest to take pleasure on the sea, I will make
                for thee a high bridge, a floating bridge, and also a
                Heavenly bird-boat. Moreover, on the Tranquil River of
                Heaven I will make a flying-bridge. I will also make for
                thee \vhite shields' of 180 seams, and Arne no Ho-hi no
                Mikoto shall be the president of the festivals in thy honour.'
                Herenpon Oho-na-mochi no Kami answered and said:-
                'The instructions of the Heavenly Deity are so courteous
                that I may not presume to disobey his commands. Let
                the August Grandchild direct the public affairs of which I
                have charge. I will retire and direct secret matters.' So
                he introduced Kunado no Rami to the two Gods, saying : -

            1  A general name for the eastern part of Japan.
            2  Heaven-sun-corner.
            3 The rope ,vas for measuring the site, say SOlne. Or it may have been for
          lashing together the timbers of the building.
            4 Or shrine.

            4) Shields are frequently mentioned in the " Norito" among offerings to the


          Gods.
                      T lIE AGE OF TIlE GODS.                                 81

      , He will take my place and will yield respectful obedience.
      I \vill withdraw and depart from here.' He forth\\"ith
      invested him with the pure Yasaka jewels, and then became
      concealed for ever. l Therefore Futsu-nushi no Kami ap-
      pointed Kunado no Kami 2 as guide, and \\-ent on a circuit II. 21.
      of pacification. An)' who \vere rebellious to his authorit},
      he put to death, while those \vho rendered obedience
      ,,,"ere rewarded. The chiefs of those ""ho at this time
      rendered obedience were Oho-mono-nushi Zi no I~anli and
       Koto-shiro-nushi no Rami. So the~y assembled the eig-ht)"
      myriads of Gods in the High Market-place of Hea\'en, and
      taking them up to Heaven \\Tith them, they declared their
      loyal behaviour. Then Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto com-
      manded Oho-mono-nushi no Kami, saying :-' If thou clost
      take to \vife one of the Deities of Earth, I silall still con-
      sider that thy heart is disaffected. I will therefore 110\\" give
      thee my daughter Mi-ho-tsu hime to be th)" \\"ife. Take with
      thee the eighty" myriads of Deities to be the guards of m}'
      AUg'ust Grandchild to all ages. So she sent hinl down
      a~ain. Thereupon Ta-oki-ho-ohi no Rami, ancestor of the
      Imbe of the Land of Kii, was appointed hatter," Hiko-sachi
      no Kami was made shield-maker,a Ma-hitotsu nc Kami ft
      \""as made metal-worker, Anie no Hi-\vashi'; no Kami was
      appointed tree-fibre maker, and Kushi-akaru-dama no Kami
        evvel-maker. 8                                                  II. 2:2.
          Taka-mi-musubi no Kami accordingI)· gave command,
      saying :-' I \\~ill set up a Heavenl~y divine fence 9 and a


    1 i.e. died.        2 The I)eity of roads.            3 (-;reat-thing-tnaster.

   • Kasa-nuhi, i.e. broad-hat-sewer.
   S Tate-nuhi, lit. shield-se\ver.

   6 Thc one-eyed God.       It is curious that the Slnith-God of Japan, like the
Cyclops of Greek fable, should have but one eye. The" Kojiki" calls hiln
Ama-tsu ~lara, as to which see Index. Also ChI K." p, 55.
   7 Sun-eagle. Tree-fibre is yufu.       It \vas the fibre for \"caving nlade of
the inner bark of the papcr-nlulberry, and perhaps also included hemp. All
these objects were used in Shinto ceremonies.
   8 Kushi means cOlnb; akaru, shining; dalua (for talna), jC\\"cl.

   9 In Japanese, himorogi. The" Shiki" says that this is the same thing\vhich

is nO"".called a shrine. but admits that its Ineaning is not clear. The usual
interpretation is that the himorogi is a fence of sakaki (thc sacred tree)
 12                                NIHONGI.

      Heavenly rock-boundary wherein to practise religious
      abstinence I on behalf of my descendants. Do ye, Arne no
      Koyane no Mikoto and Futo-dama ~ no Mikoto, take
      with you the Heavenly divine fence, and go down to the
      Central Land of Reed-Plains. Moreover, ye will there
      practise abstinence !I on behalf of my descendants.' So
      she attached the two Deities to Arne no Oshi-ho-mi-mi no
      Mikoto and sent them down. It was when Futo-dama no
      Mikoto was sent that the custom first began of worshipping
      this Deity with stout straps 4 flung over weak shoulders
      when taking the place of the Imperial hand. From this,
      too, the custom had its origin, by which Arne no Koyane
      no Mikotohad charge ofdivine matters. Therefore he was

planted round the enclosure consecrated for Shinto worship. But this
interpretation is not ,vithout difficulty. In Suinin Tenno's reign we hear of
a hilnorogi which \vas brought over from Corea and preserved as a sacred
treasure. This could hardly have been a hedge. Another interpretation
makes the himorogi an offering, and interprets the" Kuma" himorogi of the
passage just referred to as an offering- of bear's pa\\, s, one of the eight dainties
of ancient Chinese literature. But it is not easy to see ho\v this should be
preserved as a sacred treasure.
   The derivation does Rot help us much. Hi is no doubt sun, used
llletapborically, as in hi-kagami, sun-mirror or sacred.mirror; hiko, sun-
child (prince); hime, sun-female (princess). This is fairly,veU represented
by the Chinese character jI\I in the text. The remainder of the word, viz.
lnorogi, is probably moro, a word of multitude, all, many, and gi (for ki),
wood. There is a proper name, Take-morogi, where morogi is written with
characters \vhich imply this derivation. Hi-Inoro-gi is therefore a sacred row
or group of sticks of some sort or another.
   I may mention a suspicion that the hinl0rogi may be connected, perhaps
 by way of a survival, with a time when the Japanese Deities were a row of
posts roughly carved into human shape~ See above, p. 3.
   1 This and other passages show that the Shinto place of worship might be

merely a piece of ground enclosed for the purpose. The modern word {or a
 Shinto shrine, viz. ya-shiro, house-enclosure or house-area, suggests the same
 inference. See Satow, " Japanese Rituals," in " T .A.S.].," Vol. VI I., Pt. I I., p.
 115. It will be remembered that the Roman templum and the Greek TEP.fIlOS
~had originally a sinlilar signification.
   2 The ancestor of the Ilnbe, or abstainers.

   3 Including avoidance of ceremonial impurities, and hence used for
religious worship generally. See above, note to p. 41.
   • For supporting a tray on which the offerings were placed. See" T.A.S.J.,"
 Vol. VII., p. 112.
                      'rIlE AGE OF THE GODS.                                12

      made to divine by means of the Greater Divination, and
      thus to do his service!
         At this time Ama-terasll no Oho-kami took in her hand II. 23'
      the precious mirror, and, giving it to Arne no Oshi-ho-mi-
      mi no Mikoto, uttered a prayer, saying :-' My child, when
      thou lookest upon this mirror, let it be as if thou wert
      looking on file. Let it be with thee on thy couch and in
      thy hall, and let it be to thee a holy 2 mirror.' Moreover,
      she gave command to Arne no Ko-yane no Mikoto and to
      Futo-dama no Mikoto, saying :-' Attend to me, ye two
      Gods! Do ye also remain together in attendance and
      guard it well.' She further gave command, saying :-' I
      will give over to my child the rice-ears of the sacred
      garden,3 of which I partake in the Plain of High Heaven.'
      And she straight\vay took the daughter of Taka-mi-musubi
      no Mikoto, by name Yorodzu-hata-hime, and uniting her to
      Arne no Oshi-ho-mi-mi no Mikoto as his consort, sent her
      do\vn. Therefore while she \vas still in the Void of Heaven,i
      she gave birth to a child, \vho was called Ama-tsu-hiko-ho
      no ninigi no Mikoto. She accordingly desired to send down
      this grandchild instead of his parents. Therefore on him
      she bestowed Arne no Ko-yane no Mikoto, Futo-dama no
      Mikoto, and the Deities of the various Be,6 all without
      exception. She gave him, moreover, the things belonging
      to his person,6 just as above stated.
        After this, Arne no Oshi-ho-mi-mi no Mikoto went back
      again to Heaven. Therefore Ama-tsu-hiko-ho no ninigi no

    1 The Greater Divination ~'as by observing the cracks in a deer's shoulder-

 blade which had been exposed to fire. This is also a practice of the
 Chinese and Mongols, but in China it is more comll1on to use the shell of a
 tortoise for this purpose, as is sometimes done in Japan also. See Legge's
4' Chinese Classics," \t01. I I I., p. 335, 336. Ban N obUtOll10 has devoted a
 \vork in t\VO volumes to this subject, entitled.iE ~ ~.
   ~ The same ,vord as is used above for religious abstinence.
   ~ The yu-niha, in \\,hich rice \\'as gro\vn under conditions of strict
 ceremonial purity for the festival of first-fruits.
   4 Not the Takama no hara, or Plain of I-ligh Heaven, but the Dho-sora or

 Great Void, the space bet\veen Heaven and Earth. She was on her way
.downwards.
   b The hatter, shield-maker, etc., mentioned abo\'e.

   Ii The regalia, or mirror, s\vord and jewel are doubtless meant.
          84                             NIHONGI.

                Mikoto descended to the p~ak of Takachiho of Kushibi in
II. 24.         Hiuga. Then he passed through the Land of Munasohi,t
               in Sojishi, by way of the Hill of Hita\\to, in search of a
               country, and stood on a level part of the floating sand-
               bank. Thereupon he called to him Koto-katsu-kuni-
               katsu-Nagasa, the Lord of that country, and made inquiry
               of hin1. He answered and said :-' There is a country
               here. I will in an:y case obey' thy commands.' Accord-
               ingly the, August Grandchild erected a palace-hall and
               rested here. Walking after\\"ards by the sea-shore, he sa,v
               a beautiful "roman. The Allgust Grandchild inquired of
               her, saying :-' Whose child art thou?' She answered
               and said :-' Thy handmaiden is the child of Oho-yama-
               tsu-nli no Karoi. My name is Kami-ataka-ashi-tsu-hime,.
               and I am also called Ko-no-hana-saku-:ya-hinle.' Then
               she said :-' I have also an elder sister named Iha-naga-
                hime. ~ S The August Grandchild said :--' I ,,·ish to nlake
               thee Illy wife. How will this be?' She answered and
               said :-' I have a father, Oho-yama-tsu-mi no Kami, I pray
               thee ask him. The August Grandchild accordingly spake
               to Oho-yama-tsu-mi no Kami, saying :-' I have seen thy
               daughter and wish to make her my" wife.. ' Hereupon
               Oho-yama-tsu-mi no Rami sent his two daughters \yith
               one hundred tables of food and drink to offer them respect-
               fully. Now the August Grandchild thought the elder
               sister ugly, and would not take her.. So she went a\vay.
               But the younger sister was a noted beauty.. So he took
               her with him and favoured her, and in one night she became
               pregnant. 1"herefore Iha-naga-hime ,vas greatly ashamed,
               and cursed him, saying :-' If the August Grandchild had
               taken lne and not rejected me, the children born to him
               \vould have been long-lived, and would have endured for
               ever like the massy r0cks. But seeing that he has not done
               so, bllt has married my' younger sister only, the children
               born to him "rill surely be decadent like the flo,vers of the
               trees. ~ .~
                  One version is :_'10 Iha-naga-hime, in her shame and
             lAbove, p. 70, \ve have Muna-kuni 01' desert land.
            ~ }{ock-long-princcss.     Ko-no-hana-saku-ya-hinlc is the "Princess \vho
          bl0550n15 like tbe flo\vers of the trees."
                     THE .L~GE OF THE GODS.                               85
       resentment, spat and wept. She said :-' The race of
       visible mankind shall change swiftly like the flowers of
       the trees, and shall decay and pass away.' This is the
        reason why the life of man is so short.                    II. 25.
          After this, Kami-ataka-ashi-tsu-hime saw the 4\Ugust
        Grandchild, and said :-' Thy handmaiden has conceived
       a child by the August Grandchild. It is not meet tl1at it
       should be born privately.' The August Grandchild said:
       - ' Child of the Heavenly Deity though I am, how could I
       in one night cause anyone to be with child? Now it can-
       not be my child.' Kono-hana-saku-ya-hime was exceed-
       ingly ashamed and angry. She straightwa~y made a door-
       less muro, and thereupon made a vow, saying :-' If the
       child which I have conceived is the child of another Deity,
        may it surely be unfortunate. But if it is truly the off-
       spring ofthe Heavenly Grandchild,may it surely be alive and
       unhurt.' So she entered the muro, and burnt it with fire.
       At this time, when the flames first broke out, a child "vas
       born who was named Ho-no-susori no Mikoto; next ,vhen
       the flame reached its height, a child was born who was
       named Ho-no-akari no Mikoto. The next child which was
       born was called Hiko-ho-ho-demi no Mikoto,l and also
       Ho-no-wori no Mikoto."
          In one writing it is said :-" When the flames first be-
       became bright, a child ,vas born named Ho-no-akari no
       Mikoto; next, when the blaze was at its height, a child was
       born named Ho-no-susumi 2 no Mikoto, also called Ho-no-
       suseri no Mikoto; next, when she recoiled from the ·blaze,
       a child was born named Ho-no-ori-hiko..ho..ho..demi no
       Mikoto-three children in all. The fire failed to harm them,
       and the mother, too, ,vas not injured in the least. Then
       with a bamboo knife she cut their navel-strings. 3 From
       the bamboo knife which she threw away, there eventually

  1 Ho-ho-delni 110 Mikoto. The \vord Mikoto is here written with a different

and more honourable character than in the case of his t\VO brothers, for the
reason that this Deity was the direct ancestor of the l\likados. See abo'ge.
P·3·
  I Flame-advance.
  S A note to the Shukai edition lllentions a local custoln of severing the
unlbilical cord with a baulboo or copper knife. Another custoln is not to use
          86                                NIHONGI.

                sprang up a bamboo grove. Therefore that place ,vas
               called Taka-ya. l
II. 26.           Now Kami-ataka-ashi-tsu.. hime b)r divination fixed upon
               a rice-field to which she gave the name Sanada, alld £rOl11
               the rice grown there brewed Heavenly sweet sake, \vitil
               which she entertained him. Moreover, with the rice frolll
               the Nunada rice-field she made boiled rice and entertained
               him therewith." 2
                  In one writing it is said :-" Taka-mi-musubi no ivlikoto
               took the coverlet which was on the true couch and ,,"rapped
               in it Ama-tsu-hiko-kuni-teru-hiko-ho no ninigi no Mikoto,
               who forthwith drew open the rock-door of Heaven, and
               thrusting asunder the eight-piled clouds of Heaven, de-
               scended.. At this time Ama-no-oshi-hi no Mikoto, the
               ancestor of the Oho-tomo 3 no Muraji, taking ,vith hinl
               Ame-kushi-tsu Oho-kume, the ancestor of the Kume Be;~
               placed on his back the rock-quiver of Heaven, dre,\~ on his

          a knife, but to bite it through, a thin garment being interposed. I t should be
          breathed on seven times with \Varnl breath before being tied.
              Superstition and Ritual have a preference for knives of some lllore primi-
          tive material than iron. l\Iedea shears her ll1agic herbs "curvamine falcis
          ahence,''l and Zipporah performs the rite of circulllcision \\,ith a sharp stone.
          But a Inore prosaic explanation of the present passage is suggested by a
          surgeon friend. There is less hcemorrhage when a blunt instrlll11ent is llsed.
              1 Bamboo-house.

              2 This incident is the Inythical counterpart of the annual festi\'al of N ihi-

            nahe or nihi-name, now celebrated on November 23rd, \vhen the ne\v sea-
           son's rice is offered to the Gods and partaken of by the Elnperor for the
           first thne. It \\'as grown in plots of ground (yu-niha), the position of\vhich
           was fixed upon by divination and prepared under strict conditions of cere·
           monial purity. Nihi means new, n represents no, the genitive particle, and
           ahe Jueans feast. N arne means to taste.
              The 1110dern nanle of this festival is Shin-jo-sai. There is a sinlilar one in
           China. In ancient titnes there \vas no distinction l11ade bet\veen this and
           the Oho-nihe or Oho-naille, when the Enlperor at his accession offered rice
           to the Gods (now called the Daijoye), both being called Oho-nihe. The
           prayer read at the Nihi-name is given alnong the norito in the Yengishiki,
           and Hirata devotes the last three vols. of the" Koshiden " to this subject.
              3 Great escort, i.e. of the Emperor.

              .. I quite endorse Chanlberlain's shrc\vd suggestion that this KUlne is
          "nothing luore nor less than an ancient lnispronunciation ofthe Chinese \vord
          chiin (jfl), the modern Japanese gun, arnlY, troops." The Oho-tomo \vere
          the Imperial guards. Ville Ch. K., p. 112.
                      THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                 12

      forearm a dread loud-sounding elbow-pad; and grasped
      in his hand a Heavenly vegetable-wax-tree bow and a
      Heavenly feathered arrow, to which he added an eight-eyed
      sounding-arrow.2 Moreover he girt on his mallet-headed
      sword,3 and taking his place before the Heavenly Grand- II. 27·
      child, proceeded downwards as far as the floating bridge of
      Heaven, which is on the two peaks of Kushibi of Taka-
      chiho in So in Hiuga. Then he stood on a level part of
      the floating sand-bank and passed through the desert land




                                Stone Malle (s.


      of Sojishi by way of Hitawo in search of a country
      until he came to Cape Kasasa in Ata no Nagaya.
      N O\V at this place there was a God namtd Koto-katsu-
      kuni-katsu-Nagasa. Therefore the Heavenly Grandchild
      inquired of this God, saying :-' Is there a country?'
      He answered and said: - 'There is.'            Accordingly
      he said :-' I will yield it up to thee in obedience to thy
      commands.' Therefore the Heavenly Grandchild abode
      111  that place. This Koto-katsu-kuni-katsu no Rami

  I  See above, p. 34.
  2  Or nari-kabura. Giles says they were discharged by bandits as a signal
to begin an attack. " Eight-eyed" means that there \\'ere several holes
in the head, the air passing through \vhich produced a humming sound.
Parker'says that the nari-kabura is not Chinese, but an invention of the Huns.
   3 Froln the way in which these s\vords are associated with" stone-mallet ))

s\\·ords in the Jimmu Tenno narrative (see also Ch. K., pp. 112, 142), I aID
disposed to think that they \vere of stone, and probably identical with the
mallet-shaped objects called raiko sho\vn in Plate X I. of Kanda:s " Stone Im-
plements of Japan," fr0111 \\'hich the illustration is taken. They were, no
doubt, lashed to "'ooden handles, and used as \veapons.
                                                                   H
          88                            NIHONGI.

               \vas the child of Izanagi no Mikoto, and his other name is
               Shiho-tsu-tsu-no oji." 1
                   In one writing it is said :-" The Heavenly Grandchild
               favoured Ataka-ashi-tsu-hime, the daughter of Oho-yama-
               tsu-mi no Kami. In one night she became pregnant, and
               eventually gave birth to four children. Therefore Ataka-
                ashi-tsu-hime took the children in her arms, and, comIng
                forward, said :-' Ought the children of the I-Ieavenly
                Grandchild to be privately nurtured? Therefore do I
                announce to thee the fact for thy information.' At this
                time the Heavenly Grandchild looked upon the children,
                and, with a mocking laugh, said :-' Excellent-these
                princes of mine! Their birth is a delightful piece of news! '
                Therefore Ataka-ashi-tsu-hime was wroth, and said:-
                'Why dost thou mock thy handmaiden?' The Heavenly
                Grandchild said :-' There is surely some doubt of this,
                and therefore did I mock. How is it possible for me,
                Heavenly God though I am, in the space of one night to
                cause anyone to become pregnant? Truly they" are not
                my \children.' On this account Ataka-ashi-ts.u-hime was
                 more and more resentful. She made a doorless muro, into
                which she entered, and made a vow, sa~ying :-' If the
                children \\,hich I have conceived are not the offspring of
                the Heavenl.y Grandchild, let them surely perish. But if
                they are the offspring of the Heavenly Grandchild, let them
II. 28.         suffer no hurt.' So she set fire to the muro and burnt it.
                When the fire first became bright, a child sprang forth and
                announced himself, saying :-' Here am I, the child of the
                 Heavenly Deity, and my name is Ho-no-akari no Mikoto.
                 Where is my father?' Next, the child who sprang forth
                 \vhen the fire was at its height also announced himseif,
                 saying :-' Here am I, the child of the Heavenly Deity,
                 and my name is Ho-no-susumi no Mikoto. Where are my
                 father and my elder brother?' Next, the child who sprang
                 forth when the flames were becoming extinguished also
                 announced himself, saying :-' Here am I, the child of the
                 Heavenly Deity, and my name is Ho..no..ori no Mikoto.
                 Where are my father and my elder brothers?' Next,
                 \vhen she recoiled from the heat, a child sprang forth, and
                                  1   Old Ulan of the sea.
                     THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                 12

     also announced hilnself, saying :-' Here am I, the child of
     the Heavenly Deit)p, and my name is Hiko-ho-ho-demi no
     Mikoto. Where are In)' father and my elder brothers?'
     After that, their Blather, Ataka-ashi-tsu-hime, came forth
     from aluidst the embers, and approaching, told him,
     saying: - ' The children which thy handmaiden has
     brought forth, and thy handmaiden herself, have of our
     o\\'n accord undergone the danger of fire,l and yet have
     suffered not the smallest hurt. Will the Heavenly Grand-
     child not look on them?' He answered and said :-' I
     knew from the first that they were m)' children, only, as
     they \vere concei"ed in one night, I thought that there
     might be suspicions, and I \vished to let everybody know
     that the)· are 111y childr~n, and also that a Heavenly Deity
     can cause pregnancy in one night. Moreover, I wished to
     make it e,pident tl:it thou dost possess a ,vonderful and
     extraordinary dignity, ~nd also that our children have
     surpassing spirit. Therefore it "vas that on a former day
     I used \\Pords of 1110ckery. ' "
        In one ,vriting it 1s said :-" Arne no Oshi-ho-ne no
     Mikoto took to "~rife Taku-hata-chichi-hime Yorodzu-hata 2
     hime no Mikoto, daughter of Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto. ,t
        Another version sa~ys :~" Honoto-hata-hime-ko-chichi-
     hime no Mikoto, daughter of Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto."
     She bore to hin1 a child named Ama-no-ho-no-akari no
     Mikoto. N ext she bore Ama-tsu-hiko-ne-ho-no-ninigi-ne
     no Mikoto. The child of ~~ma-no-ho-no-akari no 1vIikoto
     \vas called Kag'U)~an1a no Mikoto. He is the ancestor of
     the Ohari no Muraji.                                         II. 29·
        When Taka-rni-ll111Subi no Mikoto was sending down the
     Heavenly Grandchild Ho-no-ninigi no Mikoto to the
     Central Land of Reed-Plains, she commanded the eighty
     myriads of Gods, saying :-" In the Central Land of Reed-

     J The ordeal by fire is here alluded to.    In later tilnes the ordeal of
boiling ,,"ater \\'as also practised. Both customs are kept up by Shinto
devotees in modern tin1es. See Lowell's" Esoteric Shinto," in the" 'f.A.S.J."
.A.. picture in Hokusai's " Mang\va " represents two in persons the garb of
Buddhist priests passing through the ordeal of fire.
     2 Myriad looms, or rather \vebs. The currency of ancient Japan consisted
of pieces of cloth. l-Iencc Y'orodzu-hata nleans \vealthy.
          90                              NIHONGI.

                Plains, the rocks, tree-stems and herbage have still tIle
                power of speech. At night, they make a clamour like that
               of flames of fire; in the day-time they swarm up like the
               flies in the fifth month, etc., etc." Now Taka-rni-musubi no
                Mikoto gave command, ~saying :-" I formerly sent Arne-
               waka-hiko to the Central Land of Reed-Plains, but he has
               been long absent, 'and until now has not returned, perhaps
               being forcibly prevented by some of the Gods of the Land."
               She therefore sent tIle cock-pheasant Na-naki to go thither
               and spy out the reason. This pheasant \vent doV\rn, but when
               he saw the fields of millet and the fields of pulse he remained
               there, and did not come back. This was the origin of the
               modern saying, "The pheasant special messenger." Therefore
               she afterwards sent the hen-pheasant Na-naki, and this bird
               came down and was hit by an arrow shot by Ame-\\1aka-
               hiko, after which she came up and made her report, etc.,
               etc. At this time Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto took the
               coverlet which was upon the true couch, and having
               clothed therewith the Heavenly Gtandchild Ama-tsu-
               hikone Ho-no-ninigi-ne no Mikoto, sent him downwards,
               thrusting asunder the eight-piled clouds of Heaven.
               Therefore this God was styled Ame-kuni-nigishi-hiko-ho-
               ninigi no Mikoto. Now the place at which he arrived on
               his descent is called the Peakof Sohori-yam a of Takachiho
II· 3°·        in So in Hiuga. 'Vhen he proceeded therefore on his \vay,
               etc., etc.,· he arrived at Cape Kasasa in Ata, and finally
               ascended the Island of Takashima in Nagaya. He ,vent
               round inspecting that land, and found there a man whose
               name was Koto-katsu-kuni-katsu Nagasa. The Heavenly
               Grandchild accordingly inquired of him, saying :-" Whose
               land is this? " He answered and said :-" This is the land
               where Nagasa dwells. I will, however, now offer it to the
               Heavenly Grandchild." The Heavenly Grandchild again
               inquired of him, saying :-" And the maidens \vho have
               built an eight-fathom palace on the highest crest of the
               waves and tend the loom with jingling wrist jewels, whose
               daughters are they?" He answered and said :-" They
               are the daughters of Oho-yama-tsu-mi no Rami. The elder
               is named Iha-naga-hime, and the younger is named Kono-
                         1   These etc's mark intentional omissions.
                     THE AGE OF THE GODS.                                  91
     hana saku-ya-hime, also called Toyo-ata-tsu hime, etc., etc."
     The August Grandchild accordingly favoured To:yo-ata-tsu
     hime, and after one night she became pregnant. The August
     Grandchild doubting this, etc., etc. Eventually she gave
     birth to Ho-no-suseri no Mikoto; next she bore Ho-no-ori
     no Mikoto, also called Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto. Proof
     having been given by the mother's va'\", it \vas kno\vn exactly
     that they \vere truly the offspring of the Heavenly Grandchild.
     Toyo-ata-tsu hime however was incensed at the Heavenly
     Grandchild, and would not speak to him. The Heavenl)~
     Grandchild, grieved at this, made a song, say'ing : -
                       The sea-\\'eed of the offing-·-
                       Though it Inay reach the shore:
                       The true couch
                       Is, alas ~ impossible.
                       Ah ! ye dotterels of the beach ! 1

       In one \vriting it is said :-" The daughter of Taka-mi- II. 31•
     rnusubi no Mikoto, Ama-yorodzu-taku-hata chi-hata hime."
       One version is :-" Yorodzu-hata-hime ko-dama-yori-
     hime no Mikoto was the child of Taka-mi-musubi no
     Mikoto. This Goddess became the consort of Arne no
     Oshi-hone no Mikoto, and bore to him a child named Ama-
     no Ki-ho-ho-oki-se no Mikoto."
       One version is :-" Katsll no ha~ya-hi no Mikoto's child
     was Ama no Oho-mimi no Mikoto. This God took to \\~ife
     Nigutsu hime, and had by her a child named Ninigi no
     Mikoto."
       One version is :-" The daughter of Kami-rni-musubi no
     Mikoto, Taku-hata chi-hata hime, bore a child named Ho-
     no-ninigi no Mikoto."
       One version is :-" Ama no Kise no Mikoto took to wife
     Ata-tsll hime, and had children, first Ho-no-akari no
     Mikoto, next Ho-no-yo-wori no Mikoto, and next Hiko-ho-
     ho-demi no Mikoto."
       In one writing it is said :-" Masa-ya-a-katsu-katsu-no-
     haya-hi Ama no Oshi-ho-mimi no Mikoto took to wife Ama
   I A regular tanka (short poem) of 31 syllables.    The Ineaning is: "The
\veeds of the deep sea may drift to the shore, but bet\veen thy couch and
lnine an itnpassable gulf is fixed. I appeal to you, ye dotterels of the beach!
Is it not so ?"
                                      NIIIOr\GI.

              no yorodzu-taku-hata-chi-hata hime, daughter of Taka-mi-
              musubi no ~Iikoto, and by her as consort had a child
              named Ama-teru-kuni-teru Hiko-ho no akari no Mikoto.
              He is the ancestor of the Ohari no Muraji. The next child
              \vas Ama-no-nigishi-kuni-no-nigishi Ama-tsl1-hiko-ho-no
              ninigi no Mikoto. l"'his God took to wife Kono hana saku-
              ya-hime no Mikoto, daughter of Oho-yama-tsu-mi no Kami,
              and by her as consort had first a child named Ho-no-susori
              no Mikoto, and next Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto.'"
            The elder brother Ho-no-susori no Mikoto had by nature a
         sea-gift; the younger brother Hiko-ho-ho-demi no Mikoto had
         b~y nature a mountain-gift. l In the beginning the two brothers,
         the elder and the ~younger, conversed together, saying :-" Let
         us for a trial exchange gifts." They eventually exchanged
         them, but neither of them gained aught by doing so. The elder
         brother repented his bargain, and returned to the younger
         brother his bow and arro\vs, asking for his fish-hook to be given
         back to him. But the younger brother had already lost the
         elder brother's fish-hook, and there was no means of finding it.
         He accordingly made another new hook which he offered to his
         elder brother. But his elder brother refused to accept it, and
II. 32 • demanded the old hook. The younger brother, grieved at this,
         fqrthwith took his cross-s\vord ~ and forged 3 from it Ilew fish-
         hooks, which he heaped up in a winnowing tray, and offered to his
         brother. But his elder brother was wroth, and said :-" These
         are not myoId fish-hook: though they are many, I will not
         take them." And he continued repeatedly to demand it vehe-
         mently. Therefore Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto's grief was
         exceedingly profound, and he went and made moan by the shore
         of the sea. There he met Shiho-tsutSll 4 no Oji.o The old
         man inquired of him saying :-" Why dost thou grieve here? "
         He answered and told him the matter from first to last. The
         old man said :-" Grieve no more. I will arrange this matter
         for thee." So he made a basket without interstices, and placing

         1  A talent for fishing and a talent for hunting.
         ~  The interlinear gloss has tachi, or simply swordg
         S This points to iron as the Inaterial of both swords and 6sh-hooks at the
       time when this story b~calne current. The Homeric fish-hook \vas of horn
       -~oo~ I(ipa~ o;,pavAoLo. See Index - Bronle Age.
         .. Salt. sea-elder.                         0 C;randfather or old-man.
                     THE AGE OF TIlE GODS.                                    93
in it Hoho-demi no Mikoto, sank it in the sea. Forttlwith he
found himself at a pleasant strand, ,vhere he abandoned the
basket, and, proceeding on his \va)~, suddenl)· arrived at the
palace of the Sea-God., This palace ,,';as provided \vith battle-
ments and turrets, and had stately tov\'ers. Before the gate
there was a well, and over the well there gre\" a Inan)~-branched
cassia-tree, 1 with \vide-spreading boughs and leaves. Now
Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto went up to the foot of this tree and
loitered about. After some tim~ a beautiful "'oman appeared,
and, pushing open the door, came forth. She at length took a II. 33·
jewel-vessel and approached. Shewas about to dra\vwater, \,·hen,
raising her eyes, she saw him, and \\'as alarmed. Returning\vithin,
she spoke to her father and mother, sa)Ting :-" There is a rare
stranger at the foot of the tree before the gate." The God of
the Sea thereupon prepared an eight-fold cushion and led him
in. When they had taken their seats, he inquired of him the
object of his coming. Then Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto ex-
 plained to him in reply all the circumstances. The Sea-God
 accordingly assembled the fishes, both great and small, and
 required of them an answer. They all said :-" "le kno\\~ not.
 Only the Red-woman 2 has had a sore mouth for some time past
 and has not come." She was therefore peremptoril}~ summoned
 to appear, and on her mouth being examined the lost hook was
 actually found.
   After this, Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto took to \\rife the Sea-
 God's daughter, Toyo-tama 8-hime, and d\velt in the sea-palace.
 For three years he enjoyed peace and pleasure, but still had a
 longing for his own country, and therefore sighed deeply' from
 time to time. Toyo-tama-hime heard this and told her father, II. 34.
 saying :-" The Heavenly Grandchild oftell sighs as if in grief.
 It may be that it is the sorrow of longing for his country." The
 God of the Sea thereupon drew to him Hiko-hoho-demi no


  1 A castle-gate with a tree gro\ving before it, and a \\'ell at its bottom \"hich

serves as a mirror, are the stock properties of several old-world stories. The
following is from Lang~s "Custom and Myth," p. 91 :-"Then the Giant's
dochter came to the palace ,,'here Nicht Nought Nothing was, and she went
up into a tree to watch for him. The gardener's dochter going to dra\v water
in the well, sa\v the shado\v," etc.
   t Aka-me, a name of the Tai (pagrus).                      I Rich-jewel.
       94                                NIHONGI.

        lVlikoto, and addressing him in an eaS)l, familiar wa:y, said : -
        " If the Heavenl~y Grandchild desires to return to his countr~y
        I will send him back." So he gave him the fish-hook \vhich he
        had found, and in doing so instructed him, saying :-" When
        thou givest this fish-hook to th~y elder brother, before giving to
        him call to it secretly?, and say, " A poor hook." He further
        presented to him the je"?el of the flowing tide and the je\"el of
        the ebbing tide, and instructed him, saying :-" If thou dost dip
        the tide-flowing jewel, the tide \vill suddenly flo\v, and there-
        \vithal thou shalt dro\vn thine elder brother. But in case th,-
        elder brother should repent and beg forgiveness, if, on the co~­
        trar)?, thou dip the tide-ebbing je\\rel, the tide will spontaneousl)"
        ebb, and there\vithal thou shalt save him. If thou harass him
        in this way, thy elder brother \\?ill of his o\vn accord render
        submission."
           When the HeavenlyT Grandchild \vas about to set out all his
        return journey, To~yo-tama-himeaddressed him, saying :_11' Thy'
        handmaiden is alread)T pregnant, and the time of her deliver)~ is
        not far off. On a da)~ "Then tIle \vinds and waves are raging, I
        will surely come forth to the sea-shore, and I pra~y thee that
        thou wilt make for me a parturition house,· and await me
        there."
           \\Then Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto returned to his palace, he
        complied implicitly "rith the instructions of the Sea-God, and
        the elder brother, Ho-no-susori no Mikoto, finding himself in
        the utmost straits, of his own accord admitted his offence, and
II. 35. said :-" Henceforward I \\"ill be thy subject to perform mimic
        dances for thee. I beseech thee mercifull:y to spare m)~ life.··
        Thereupon he at length yielded his petition, and spared him.'J
        This Ho-no-susori no Mikoto was the first ancestor of the
        Kimi of W obashi in Ata.
           After this Toyo--tama-hime fulfilled her promise, and, bringing
        with her her younger sister, Tama-yori-hime, bravely confronted
        the winds and waves, and came to the sea-shore. When the
        time of her delivery \\las at hand, she besought Hiko-hoho-demi
        no NIikoto, sa)'ing :_H When thy handmaiden is in travail, I
         1   See above, p. 73.
         ~ Ever since the tilue of Cain and Abel, folk-lore has had    a curious par·
       tiality for the younger of t,vo brothers.   The Jinl1nu legend contains several
       instances of this.
                     TIlE AGE OF THE GODS.                                 95
pray thee do not look upon her." However, the Heavenly
Grandchild could not restrain himself, but went secretly and
peeped in. No\v Toyo-tama-hime was just in childbirth, and
had changed into a dragon.! She was greatly ashamed, and
said :-" Hadst thou not disgraced me, I would have made the
sea and land communicate with each other, and for ever pre-




vented them from being sundered. But now that thou hast
disgraced me, where\vithal shall friendly feelings be knit to-
gether ?" So she wrapped the infant in rushes, and abandoned
it on the sea-shore. Then she barred the sea-path, and passed
away.~ Accordingly the child was called Hiko-nagisa-take-u-
gaya-fuki-ahezu 3 no Mikoto.
   A long time after, Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto died, and \vas
buried in the Misasagi on the summit of Mount Takaya in
 Hiuga.
        In one writing it is said :-" The elder brother Ho-no- II 6
                                                                    · 3·
     susori no Mikoto had acquired a mountain-gift. No\v the
     elder and younger brothers wished to exchange gifts, and
     therefore the elder brother took the bow which was of the gift
     of the younger brother, and went to the mour:tain in quest

  1 In the accoo1panying illustration from a Japanese book (printed 1746),

the Sea-King and his daughter are represented as combining the Dragon
with the human form. See above, p. 61.
   ~ "There are Inany exalnples of the disappearance of the bride or bride·
groom in consequence of the infringen1ent of various mystic ru!es." Lang's
"Custom and Myth," p. 81.
  a Prince-beach-brave·cormorant-rush-thatch-un6nished. "fhe application
of the latter part of the name will appear from one of the variant Inyths given
belo\\" . See also Ch. K., p. 127.
          96                          NIIIONGI.

               of wild animals. But never a trace of ganle did he see.
               The younger brother took the fish-hook of his elder
               brother's gift, and \vith it went a-fishing on the sea, but
               caug-ht none at all, and finally lost his fish-hook. Then
               the elder brother restored his younger brother's bo\v and
               arro\,"s, and demanded his o\\:n fish-hook. The younger
               brother was sorry, and of the cross-s,vord which he had
               in his girdle made fish-hooks, which he heaped up in
               a \vinno\ving tray, and offered to his elder brother. But
               the elder brother refused to receive them, saying :-' I still
               wish to get the fish-hook of my gift." Hereupon Hiko-
               hoho-demi no Mikoto, not knowing \vhere to look for it,
               only grieved and made moan. He went to the sea-shore,
               where he wandered up and down lamenting. No\\r there
               \vas an old mail, who suddenly carne for\,·ard, and gave
                his name as Shiho-tsuchi no Oji. He asked him,
                saying :-' Who art thou, IllY lord, and why dost thou
                grieve here?' Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto told him all
                that had happened. Whereupon the old man took from a
                bag a black comb, which he flung upon the ground. It
                straig-ht\\'ay became changed into a multitudinous 1 clump
                of bamboos. Accordingly he took these bamboos and
                nlade of them a coarse basket with wide meshes, in which
                he placed Hiko-hoho~deJTli no Mikoto, and cast him into
                the sea."
                   One version says :-" He took a katama without
                interstices, and made of it a float, to which he attached
                Hoho-demi by a cord and sunk him." [The term kata1na
                11zeans what zs no1.V called a bamboo-basket.)
                   N ow there is in the bottom of the sea a natural " Little-
                shore of delight." Proceeding onwards, along this shore,
                he arrived of a sudden at the palace of Toyo-tama-hiko, the
                 God of the Sea. This palace had magnificent gates r~nd
                 to\vers of exceeding beauty. Outside the gate there \vas a
                 \vell, and beside the well ,vas a cassia-tree·. He approached
II. 32.
                 the foot of this tree, and stood there. After a \vhile
                 a beautiful woman, whose countenance was such as is not
                 any,vhere to be seen, came out from within, followed by a
                 bevy of attendant maidens. She was drawing water in a
                                       I   Lit. 500.
            THE AGE OF THE GODS.                      97
jewel-urn, when she looked up and saw Hoho-demi no
Mikoto. She was startled, and returning, told the God, her
father, saying :-' At the foot of the cassia-tree without
the gate, there is a noble stranger of no ordinary build. If
he had come down from Heaven, he would have had on
him the filth of Heaven; if he had come from Earth, he
would have had on him the filth of Earth. Could he be
reallj7 the beautiful prince of the sky? '
   One version says :-" An attendant of Toyo-tama-hime
was drawing water in a jewel-pitcher, but she could not
manage to fill it. She looked down into the well, when
there shone inverted there the smiling face of a man. She
looked up and there was a beautiful God leaning against a
cassia-tree. She accordingly returned within, and informed
her mistress.
   Hereupon Toyo-tama-hiko sent a man to inquire,
saying :-' Who art thou, 0 stranger., and why hast thou
come here?' Hoho-demi no Mikoto answered and said : -
'I am the grandchild of the Heavenly Deity,' and ulti-
mately went on to give the reason of his coming.
   Then the God of the Sea went out to meet him. He
made him obeisance, and led him within, where he inquired
courteously of his welfare, and gave him to wife his
daughter, Toyo-tama-hime. Therefore he remained and
dwelt in the palace of the sea. Three years passed, after
which Hoho-demi no Mikoto sighed frequently, and Toyo-
tama-hime asked him, saying :-' Does the Heavenly
Grandchild perchance wish to return to his native land?'
He answered and said :-' It is so.' Toyo-tama-hime
forthwith told the God her father, and said :-' The
noble guest who is here wishes to return to the upper
country.' Hereupon the God of the Sea assembled all the II. 38.
fishes of the sea, and asked of them the fish-hook. Then
one fish answered and said :-' The Red-woman 1 (also
called tke Red Tahz) has long had an ailment of the mouth.
I suspect that she has swallowed it.' So the Red-woman
was forthwith summoned, and on looking into her mouth, the
hook was still there. It was at once taken and delivered
to Hiko-hoho-demi no ?vfikoto, with these instructions : -
                   1   See above, p. 93.
          98                             NIHONGI.

                , When thou givest the fish-hook to thy elder brother, thou
                must use this imprecation: "The origin of poverty: the be-
                ginning of starvation: the root of wretchedness." Give it not
                to him until thou hast said this. Again, if thy brother cross
                the sea, I will then assuredly stir up the blasts and billows, and
                make them overwhelm and vex him.' Thereupon he placed
                Hoho-demi no Mikoto on the back of a great sea-monster,
                and so sent him back to his own country.
                   At another time, before this, Toyo-tama-hime spoke in
                an easy, familiar way, and said :-' Thy handmaid is with
                child. Some day, when the winds and waves are boisterous,
                I will come forth to the sea-shore, and I pray thee to con-
                struct for me a parturition-house, and to await me there.'
                   After this, Toyo-tama-hime fulfilled her promise to come,
                and spake to Hoho-demi no Mikoto, saying :-' To-night
                thy handmaiden will be delivered. I pray thee, look not
                0:1 h~r.'  Hoho-demi no Mikoto ,Yould not hearken to her,
                 but with a comb 1 he made a light, and looked at her. At
                this time Toyo-tama-hime had become changed into an
                enormous sea-monster of eight fathoms, and was wriggling
                 about on her belly. She at last was angry that she \vas
                 put to shame, and forthvvith went straight back agai~ to
                 her native sea, leaving behind her younger sister Tama-Y'0ri-
II. 39.          hime as nurse to her infant. The child was called Hiko-
                 nagisa-take-u-gaya-fuki-ayezu no Mikoto, because the
                parturition-house by the sea-shore was all thatched with
                cormorants' feathers, and the child was born before the
                tiles had met. It was for this reason that he received this
                name." 2
                   One version says :-" Before the gate there was a beau-
                tiful well, and over the well there grew a cassia-tree with
                an hundred branches. Accordingly Hiko-hoho-demi no
                Mikoto sprang up into that tree and stood there. At this
                time, 1~oyo-tama-hime, the daughter of the God of the
                Sea, came with a jewel-bowl in her hand and was about to
                draw water, when she saw in the well the reflection of a
            I  See above, p. 24.
            2  There is a superstition that a woman in childbirth gained relief by
          holding a cormorant's feather in her hand. A cowrie (ko-yasu-gai) is used
          for the same purpose, no doubt on account of its shape. See above, p. 95.
             TtlE AGE OF TIlE GODS.                     99
man. She looked up and was startled, so that she let fall
the bowl, which was broken to pieces. But without regard
for it, she returned within and told her parents, saying:-
, I have seen a man on the tree which is beside the well.
His countenance is very beautiful, and his form comely.
He is surely no ordinary person.' When the God, her
father, heard ttlis, he wondered. Having prepared an
eight-fold cushion, he went to meet him, and brought him
in. When they were seated, he asked the reason of his
coming, upon which he answered and told him all his case.
N ow the God of the Sea at once conceived pity for him,
and summoning all the broad of fin and narrow of fin,
made inquiry of them. They all said :-' We know not.
Only the Red-woman has an ailment of the mouth
and has not come.' lAnother version is :-' The Kuchi-me 1
has an ailment of the mouth.'] So she was sent for in all
haste, and on searching her mouth, the lost fish-hook was
at once found. Upon this the God of the Sea chid her,
 saying :-' Thou Kuchime! Henceforward thou shalt not
 be able to swallow a bait, nor shalt thou be allowed to have
 a place at the table of the Heavenly Grandchild.' This is
 the reason why the fish kuchime is not among the articles
 of food set before the Emperor.
    When the time came for Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto to
 take his departure, the God of the Sea spake to him, say..
 ing :-' I am rejoiced in my inmost heart that the Heavenly
 Grandchild has now been graciously pleased to visit me.
 When shall I ever forget it ?' So he took the jewel which II. 40 •
 when thought of makes the tide to flow, and the jewel
 which when thought of makes the tide to ebb, and joining
 them to the fish-hook, presented them, saying :-' Though
 the Heavenly Grandchild may be divided from me byeight-
 fold windings (of road), I hope that we shall think of each
 other from time to time. Do not therefore throw them
 away.' And he taught him, saying :-' When thou givest
 this fish-hook to thy elder brother, call it thus :-' A hook
 of poverty, a hook of ruin, a hook of downfall.' When
 thou hast said all this, fling it away to him with thy back
 turned, and deliver it not to him face to face. If thy elder
             1   Kuchi-me means" mouth-feluale."
          100                            NIHONGI.

                brother is angry, and has a mind to do thee hurt, then
                produce the tide-flowing jewel and drown him therewith.
                As soon as he is in peril and appeals for mercy, bring forth
                the tide-ebbing jewel and therewith save him. If thou dost
                vex him in this way, he will of his own accord become thy
                submissive vassal.'     Now Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto,
                having received the jewels and the fish-hook, came back to
                his original palace, and followed implicitly the teaching of
                the Sea-God. ~"'irst of all he offered his elder brother the
                fish-hook. His elder brother was angry and would not re-
                ceive it. Accordingly the younger brother produced the
                tide-flowing jewel, PPOfl which the tide rose with a might)~
                overflow, and the elder brother was drowning. Therefore
                he besought his younger brother, saying :-' I will serve
                thee as thy slave. I beseech thee, spare my life.' The
                younger brother then produced the tide-ebbing jewel,
                whereupon the tide ebbed of its own accord, and the elder
                brother was restored to tranquillity. After this the elder
                brother changed his former words, and said :-' I am thy
                elder brother. How can an elder brother serve a younger
                brother?' Then the younger brother produced the tide-
                flowing jewel, which his elder brother seeing, fled up to a
                high mountain. Thereupon the tide also submerged the
                mountain. The elder brother climbed a lofty tree, and
                thereupon the tide also submerged the tree. The elder
                brothet was now at an extremity, and had no\\"here to
II· 41.         flee to. So he acknowledged his offence, saying :-' I have
                been in fault. In future my descendants for eighty gener-
                ations shall serve thee as thy minles in ordinary. [One
                version has' dog-men.'] I pray thee, have pity on me.'
                Then the )"ounger brother produced the tide-ebbing jewel,
                whereupon the tide ceased of its own accord. Hereupon
                the elder brother saw that the younger brother was pos-
                sessed of marvellous powers, and at length submitted to
                serve him.
                   On this account the various H'ayato descended from Ho
                no susori no Mikoto to the present time do not leave the
                vicinity of the enclosure of the Imperial Palace, and render
                service instead of barking dogs. 1
           I   The Hayato constituted the Imperial Guard. The literal meaning of the
                   '[HE AGE OF THE GODS.                             101

       This was the origin of the custom which now prevails of
    not pressing a man to return a lost needle." 1
       In one writing it is said :-" The elder brother, Ho no
    susori no Mikoto, was endowed with a sea-gift, and was
    therefore called Vmi no sachi-hiko : 2 the younger brother,
    Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto, was endowed with a mountain-
    gift, and was therefore called Yama no sachi-hiko. When- II. 42·
    ever the wind blew and the rain fell, the elder brother lost
    his gain, but in spite of wind and rain the younger brother's
    gain did not fail him. Now the elder brother spoke to the
    younger brother, saying :-' I wish to make trial of an ex-
    change of gifts with thee.' The younger brother consented,
    and the exchange was accordingly made. Thereupon the
    elder brother took the younger brother's bow and arrows,
    and went a-hunting to the mountain: the younger brother
    took the elder brother's fish-hook, and went on the sea
    a-fishing. But neither of them got anything, and they
    came back empty-handed. The elder brother accordingly
     restore.d to the :younger brother his bow and arrows, and
    demanded back his own fish-hook. Now the younger
     brother had lost the fish·hook in the sea, and he knew not
     how to find it. Therefore he made other new fish-hooks,
     several thousands in number, which he offered to his elder
     brother. The elder brother was angry, and would not re-
     ceive them, but demanded importunately the old fish"hook,
     etc., etc. Then the younger brother went to the sea-shore
     and wandered about, grieving and making moan. Now

name (for haya-bito) is falcon-ulan. They were from the provinces of
Satsuma and Ohosumi. The Hayato are mentioned repeatedly in the reigns
of Temulu and lito, not, I think, before that time.
  The Yengi-shiki (regulations of the Yengi,901-923 period) says that on
the first day of the year, at coronations, and when foreign envoys were
received, twenty upper class hayato were to attend, twenty "new-comer"
harato, and 132 ordinary hayato. These were to take their posts in detach-
ments to right and left outside the Palace Gate. When the officials first
entered, or got up from their seats, the "new-comer" hayato raised three
barks, and there was more barking or howling, sometimes loud and some-
times low, at other stages of the ceremony.
   1 The Japanese word hari means both needle and fish-hook.  There is no
such ambiguity in the Chinese characters used here.
   I Sea-gift-prince.
          102                               NIHONGI.

                there was there a river wild-goose which had become en-
                tangled in a snare, and was in distress. He took pity on it,
                and loosing it, let it go. Shortly after there appeared Shiho
                tsutsu no Oji. He came and made a skiff of basket-wor~
                without interstices, in which he placed Hoho-demi no
                 Mikoto and pushed it off into the sea, when it sank
                down of its own accord, till of a sudden there appeared the
                Pleasant Road. So he went on along this road, which in
                due course led him to the palace of the Sea-God. Then the
                Sea-God came out himself to meet him, and invited him to
                enter. He spread eight layers of sea-asses' 1 skins, on which
                he made him to sit, and with a banquet of tables of a hun-
                dred, which was already prepared, he fulfilled the rites of
                hospitality. Then he inquired of him in an easy manner : -
                , Wherefore has the Grandchild of the Heavenly Deity been
                graciously pleased to come hither? ' "
                   [One version has :-" A little while ago my child came
                and told me that the Heavenly Grandchild was mourning
                by the sea-shore. Whether this be true or false I know
                not, but perhaps it may be so." J
                   Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto related to him all that had
                happened from first to last. So he remained there, and
                the Sea-God gave him his daughter Toyo-tama-hime to
                wife. At length, when three years had passed in close and
II. 43.         warm affection, the time came for him to depart. So the
                Sea-God sent for the tahi, and on searching her mouth found
                there the fish-hook. '"[hereupon he presented the fish-hook
                to Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto, and instructed him thus : -
                , When thou givest this to thy elder brother thou must
                recite the following :-" A big hook, an eager hook, a poor
                hook, a silly hook." After saying all this, fling it to him with
                a back-handed motion.' Then he summoned together the
                sea-monsters, and inquired of them, saying :-' The Grand-
                child of the Heavenly Deity is now about to take his de-
                parture homewards. In how many days will you accom-
                plish this service?' Then all the sea-monsters fixed each a
                number of days according to his own length. Those of

            1 The interlinear gloss has Inichi.   One of the marine carnivora is Ineant,
          probably the seal.
           TIlE AGE OF THE GODS.                    1°3
them which were one fathom long of their own accord said:
- ' In the space of one day we will accomplish it.' The one-
fathom sea-monsters were accordingly sent with him as his
escort. Then he gave him two precious objects, the tide-
flowing jewel and the tide-ebbing jew~lt and taught him how
to use them. He further instructed him, saying :-' If thy
elder brother should make high fields, do thou make puddle
fields; if thy elder brother make puddle fields, do thou make
high fields. In this manner did the Sea-God in all sin-
cerity lend him his aid. Now Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto,
when he returned home, followed implicitly the God's in-
structions, and acted accordingly. When the younger
brother produced the tide-flowing jewel, the elder brother
forthwith flung up his hands in the agony of drowning.
But when, on the other hand, he produced the tide-ebbing
jewel, he was relieved, and recovered. After that Hi no
susori no Mikoto pined away from day to day, and
lamented, saying :-' I have become impoverished.' So he
yielded submission to his younger brother.
   Before this Toyo-tama-hime spake to the Heavenly II. 44.
Grandchild, saying :-' That which thy handmaid has
conceived is the offspring of the Heavenly Grandchild.
How could I give birth to it in the midst of the ocean?
Therefore when the time of my delivery comes, I will surely
betake myself to my lord's abode, and it is my prayer that
thou shouldst build me a house by the sea-side and
await me there.' Therefore Hiko-ho-ho-demi no Mikoto,
as soon as he returned to his own country, took cormorants'
feathers, and with them as thatch, made a parturition-house.
But before the tiling of the house was completed, Toyo-
tama-hime herself arrived, riding on a great tortoise, with
her younger sister Tama-yori-hime, and throwing a
splendour over the sea. Now the months of her pregnancy
were already fulfilled, and the time of her delivery was
urgent. On this account she did not wait till the
thatching of the house was completed, but went straight in
and remained there. Then she spake quietly to the
Heavenly Grandchild, saying: - ' Thy handmaid is
about to be delivered. I pray thee do not look on her.'
The Heavenly Grandchild wondered at these words, and
                                                I
          1°4                              NIHONGI.

                peeped in secretly, when behold, she had become changed
                into a great sea-monster of eight fathoms. N ow she was
                aware that the Heavenly Grandchild had looked in upon
                her privacy, and was deeply ashamed and resentful. When
                the child was born, the Heavenly Grandchild approached
                and made inquiry', saying :-' By what name ought the
                child to be called?' She answered and said :-' Let him
                be called Hiko-nagisa-take-u-gaya-fuki-ahezu no Mikoto.' 1
                Having said so, she took her departure straight across
                the sea. Then Hiko-hoho-demi no Mikoto made a song,
                saYlng:-
                                     Whatever befals nle,
                                     N e'er shall I forget my love
                                     With ,vhom I slept
                                     In the island of wild-ducks--
                                     The birds of the offing." : .
II. 45.           Another account sa~ys :-" Hiko-ho-ho-demi no Mikoto
                took other women and Inade them wet-nurses, bathing-
                women, boiled-rice-chewers, and washerwomen. 3 All these
                various Be were pro,'ided for the respectful nurture of
                the infant. The provision at this time, by means of other
                women, of milk for the nurture of the august child was the
                origin of the present practice of engaging temporarily ,vet-
                nurses to bring up infants.
                  After this, when Toyo-tama-hime heard what a fine boy
                her child was, her heart was greatly moved \vith affection,
                and she wished to come back and bring him up herself.
                But she could not rightly do so, and therefore she sent her
                younger sister Tama-yori-hime to nurture him. NO\\T \vhen
                Toyo-tama-hime sent Tama-yori-hime, she offered (to Hoho-
                demi no Mikoto) the following verse in ans\\·er:-
                                        SOlne may boast
                                        Of the splendour
                                        Of red je\vels,

            1   See above, p. 95.
            ~ The order of the lines in the original is exactly the reverse of the abo\ge.
          1\1etre, regular tanka.
             The \vord for "my love" is i1110, ,vhich in ancient Japanese is used
          indifferently for \vife and younger sister. See above, p. 22.
             3 Evidently the narrator is here describing the staff of the lnlperial

          nursery of the day.
                    TI-IE AGE OF THE GODS.                              1°5
                      But those worn by my Lord-
                      I t is they which are admirable. l

        These two stanzas, one sent, and one in reply, are \vhat
      are termed age-uta." ~
         In one writing it is said :-" The elder brother, Ho no
      susori no Mikoto had a sea-gift, while the younger brother,
      Ho no ori no Mikoto, had a mountain gift, etc., etc.
         The younger brother remained by the sea-shore grieving II. 46.
      and making moan, when he met with Shiho-tsutsu no Oji,
      who inquired of him, saying :-' Why clost thou grieve in this
      ,vay ?' Ho no ori no Mikoto answered and said, etc., etc.
         The old man said :-' Grieve no longer. I will devise a
      plan.' So he unfolded his plan, saying :-' The courser
      on which the Sea-God rides is a sea-monster eight fathoms
      in length, who with fins erect stays in the small orange-
      tree house. I ,viii consult with him.' So he took Ho no
      ori no Mikoto with him, and \vent to see the sea-monster.
      The sea-monster then suggested a plan, sa)ling :-' I could
      bring the Heavenly Grandchild to the Sea-Palace after a
      journey of eight days, but my King has a courser, a sea-
      monster of one fathom, who will without doubt bring him
      thither in one day. I ,viiI therefore return and make him
      come to thee. Thou shouldst mount him, and enter the
      sea. When thou enterest the sea, thou wilt in due course
      find there " the Little-shore of delight." Proceed along this
      shore and thou wilt surely arrive at the palace of my King.
      Over the \vell at the palace gate there is a multitudinous
      branching cassia-tree. Do thou climb up on to this tree
      and stay there.' Having so said, he entered into the sea,
      and departed. Accordingly the Heavenly Grandchild, in
      compliance with the sea-monster's \vords, remained there,
      and waited for eight days, when there did indeed appear to
      him a sea-monster of one fathom. He mounted on it, and
      entered the sea, where he followed in every particular the
      former sea-monster's advice. Now there appeared an
      attendant of Toyo-tama-hime, carrying ajewel-vesseI, with

  1 The" Kojiki " gives a different version of this poem. Vide Ch. K., p. 128.
  2 Ageru means to exalt, hence to praise, and age·uta may be rendered
" complimentary poetry."
          106                             NIHONGI.

                which she was about to draw water from the well, when
                she espied in the bottom of the water the shadow of a man.
                She could not draw water, and looking up saw the Heavenly
                Grandchild. Thereupon she went in and informed the
                King, saying :-' I had thought that my Lord alone was
                supremely handsome, but now a stranger has appeared who
                far excels him in beauty.' When the Sea-God heard this,
                he said :--' I will try him and see.' So he prepared a
                threefold dais. Thereupon the Heavenly Grandchild wiped
                both his feet at the first step of the dais. At the middle
                one he placed both his hands to the ground; at the inner
                one he sat down at his ease 1 upon the cushion covering
                the true couch. When the Sea-God saw this, he knew that
                this was the grandchild of the Heavenly Deity, and treated
II. 47·         him with more and more respect, etc., etc.
                   The Sea-God summoned the Akame and the Kuchime,
                and made inquiry of them. Then the Kuchime drew a
                fish ..hookfrom her mouth and respectfully delivered it to him.
                [TheAka1ne is the Red Tahi a1zd the Kuch£me is the Na)'osh£.]2
                The Sea-God then gave the fish-hook to Hiko-hoho-demi
                no Mikoto, and instructed him, saying :-' When thy
                elder brother's fish-hook is returned to him, let the
                Heavenly Grandchild say :-" Let it be to all thy descend-
                ants, ofwhatever degree of relationship, a poor hook, a paltr~y
                poor hook." When thOll hast thus spoken, spit thrice, and
                give it to him. Moreover, when thy elder brother goes to
                sea a-fishing, let the Heavenly Grandchild stand on the
                sea-shore and do that which raises the wind. Now that
                which raises the wind is whistling. If thou doest so, I will
                forthwith stir up the wind of the offing and the wind of the
                shore, and will overwhelm and vex him with the scurrying
                waves.' Ho no ori no Mikoto returned, and obeyed
                implicitly the instructions of the God. When a day came
                on which the elder brother went a-fishing, the younger
                brother stood on the shore of the sea, and whistled. Then
                there arose a sudden tempest, and the elder brother was
                forthwith overwhelmed and harassed. Seeing no means of

            I i.e. with legs crossed, \vhich is less respectful than the usual squattin~

          posture.                               2 Mullet.
                     THE A(iE OF 1'I1E GODS.                                107

    saving his life, he besought his younger brother from afar,
    saying :-' Thou hast dwelt long in the ocean-plain, and
    must possess some excellent art. I pray' thee teach it to
    me. If thou save my life, my descendants of all degrees
    of relationship shall not leave the neighbourhood of th~y
    precinct, but shall act as thy mime-vassals.' Thereupon
    the younger brother left off whistling, and the \\-rind again
    returned to rest. So the elder brother recognized the
    y~ounger brother's power, and freely admitted his fault.       But
    the :younger brother \vas \\Troth, and would hold no converse
    \vith him. Hereupon the elder brother, \vith nothing but
    his waistcloth on, and smearing the palms of his hands and
    his face \vith red earth, said to his younger brother:- II. 48.
    , Thus do I defile my body', and make Inyse~f thy nlime for
    ever.' So kicking up his feet, he danced along and
    practised the manner of his drowning struggles. First
    of all, \\'hen the tide reached his feet, he did the foot-
    divination; I \,'hen it reached his knees, !'Ie raised up his feet;
    \vhen it reached his thighs, he ran round in a circle; \vhen
    it reached his loins, he rubbed his loins; when it reached
    his sides, he placed his hands upon his breast; \"hen it
    reached his neck, he threw up his hands, waving- his palms.
    From that time until no\\', this custom has never ceased.
       Before this, To~yo-tama-hime came forth, and when the
    time came for her deliver}', she besought the Heavenly'
    Grandchild, sa),ring-, etc., etc.
       The Heavenl)' Grandchild did not campI)' with her
    request, and To~yo-tama-hime resented it greatl)', say-
     ing :-' Thou didst not attend to my words, but didst put
     me to shame. Therefore from this time for\vard, do not
    send back again any of the female servants of th)r handmaid
    \\rho may go to thy place, and I will not send back any of
    thy servants who may come to ill,Y place.' At length she
    took the coverlet of the true couch and rushes, and
     wrapping her child in them, laid him on the beach. She
    then entered the sea and went awa.y. This is the reason
    why there is no communication bet\veen land and sea."               II. 49-
       One version say's :-" The statement that she placed the

1   i e. shuffled \vith his feet, as when perforlning this kind of divination.
          J08                              NIHONGI.

              child on the beach is wrong. Toyo-tama-hime no Mikoto
              departed with the child in her own arms. Many days
              after, she said :-' It is not right that the offspring of the
              Heavenly Grandchild should be left in the sea,' so she made
              Tama-yori-hime to take him, and sent him away. At first,
              when Toyo-tama-hime left, her resentment was extreme,
              and Ho no ori no Mikoto therefore knew that they would
              never meet again, so he sent her the verse of poetry which
              is already given above."
            Hiko-nagisa-take-u-gaya-fuki-ahezu no Mikoto took his aunt
          Tama-yori-hime as his consort, and had -by her in all four
          male children, namely, Hiko-itsu-se 1 no Mikoto, rtext Ina-ihi 2
          no Mikoto, next Mi-ke-iri-no 3 no Mikoto, and next Kamu-
          yamato-Ihare-biko no Mikoto. Long after, Hiko-nagisa-take-u-
          gaya-fuki-ahezu no Mikoto died, in the palace of the western
          country, and was buried in the Misasagi on the top of Mount
          Ahira in Hiuga.
                 One \vriting says :-" His first child was Hiko-itsu-se no
              Mikoto, the next Ina-ihi no Mikoto, the next Mi-ke-iri-no no
              Mikoto, and the next Sano no Mikoto, also styled Kamu 4 •
              yamato-Ihare-biko no Mikoto. Sano was the name by
              which he was called when young. Afterwards when he
              had cleared and subdued the realm, and had control of the
II.50 •       eight islands, the title was added of Kamu-yamato Ihare-
              biko no Mikoto."
                 In one writing it is said :-" His first child was Itsu-se
              no Mikoto, the next Mikeno no Mikoto, the next Ina-ihi no
              Mikoto, and the next Ihare-biko no Mikoto, also styled
              Kamu-yamato Ihare-biko Hoho-demi no Mikoto."
                 In one writing it is said :-" First he had Hiko-itsuse no
              Mikoto, next Ina-ihi no Mikoto, next Kamu-yamato Ihare
              biko Hoho-demi no Mikoto, next Waka-mi-ke-no no
              Mikoto."
                 In one writing it is said :-" First he had Hiko-itsu-se
              no Mikoto, next Ihare-biko Hoho-demi no Mikoto, next
              Hiko Ina-ihi no Mikoto, next Mi-ke-iri-no no Mikoto."

                 1   Prince-five-reaches.             2    Boiled rice.
                 3   Three-hairs..enter.Ul00r.         4   Or Karoi.
                                BOOK III.
                                                                     1
             THE EMPh.ROR KAMI-YAMATO IHARE-BIKO.


                          (JIAIMU TENNO.)

THE    Emperor Kami Yalnato Ihare-hiko's personal nanle \va~

   1 Emperor is as near an equivalent as possible of the Chinese ~ ~.

Both are foreign words. The Japanese interlinear gloss is Sumera ~likoto
" suprelne nlajesty," SU1l1Cra having the saIne root as suberu, "to unite as a
\vhole"; hence, "to have general control of." See Sato\\", "Rituals,"
" T.A.S.] .," VI I., ii., p. I 13.
  Yamato, see above, note to p. 13.
   Ihare is the name of a district of Yamato; Hiko Ineans prince.
  ]immu (divine yalour) is a posthutnous nalne. These names for the
earlier Mikados \vere inyented in the reign of KWalllnlU (782-806), after the
" Nihongi " \vas written, but it is necessary to mention theln, as they are in
universal use by Japanese ,,'riters.
   In this narrative \\'e have probably a legendary echo of a real nl0vement
of population from Kiushiu east\vards to Yalnato, at sOlne titne before the
Christian epoch, but it is not safe to go further than this. The details are
manifestly fictitious, some of theln, as the quotations from Chinese books put
into the Inouth of Jilnmu Tenno, delnonstrably so.
   Granting for a InOluent that the narrative ofthe Conquest of "'"alnato by Jimnlu
Tenno is substantially true, the question arises, Of ,vhat race \vere the tribes
\VhOnl he found there? I \,"ould suggest that they may have been the Southern
Wa lnentioned in the" Shan hai king," a very ancient Chinese book, as being,
along \vith the Northern Wa, subject to the kingdom of Yen. The Chinese in
ancient tinles had a notion that Yalnato lay to the south of Kiushiu. \ren,
a kingdo1l1 of Northern China, had an independent existence frolll B.C. 1122
to B.C. 265. Chanlberlain has pointed out that the ancient legends of Japan
are connected \vith three distinct centres-Idzumo, Yanlato, and Tsukushi,
\vhich is SOJne indication that these places \\'ere also centres of go\"ernlnental
authority. The nalnes given to the chieftains subdued by Jimmu Tenno are
unnlistakably Japanese, as are also those of the places \vhich they inhabited.
I cannot agree "'ith Chalnberlain in deriving Yalnato, Ki, Shinla, etc., from
Aino \vords, ,vhen obvious Japanese explanations are available. There is
another Yalnato in Chikugo, \\"here the Aino derivation is surely out of place.
I have no desire, however, to dispute all his Aino derivations of place naines
       110                             NlliONGI.

        Hiko-hoh.o-demi. He was the fourth child l ofHiko-nagisa-take-
        u-gaya-fuki-ahezu no Mikoto. His mother's name was Tama-
        yori-hime, daughter of the Sea-God. From his birth, this
        Emperor was of clear intelligence and resolute will. At the
III. 2. age of fifteen he was made heir to the throne. When he grew
        up, he married Ahira-tsu-hime, of the district of Ata in the
        province of Hiuga, and made her his consort. By her he had
        Tagishi-mimi no Mikoto and Kisu-mimi no Mikoto.
          When he reached the age of forty-five, he addressed his elder
        brothers and his children, saying :-" Of old, our Heavenly
        Deities Taka-mi-musubi no Mikoto, and Oho-biru-me no
        Mikoto, pointing to this land of fair rice-ears of the fertile reed-
        plain, gave it to our Heavenly ancestor, Hiko-ho no ninigi
        no Mikoto. Thereupon Hiko-ho no ninigi no Mikoto, throwing
        open the barrier of Heaven and clearing a cloud-path, urged on
        his superhuman course until he came to rest. At this time the
        world was given over to widespread desolation. It was an age
        of darkness and disorder. In this gloom, therefore, he fostered
        justice, and so governed this western border. 2 Our Imperial
        ancestors and Imperial parent, like gods, like sages, accumulated
        happiness and amassed glory. Many years elapsed. From the
        date when our Heavenly ancestor descended until now it is over
III. 3. 1,79 2 ,47 0 years. 1 But the remote regions do not yet enjoy the
        blessings of Imperial rule. Every town has always been allowed
        to have its lord, and every village its chief, who, each one for
        himself, makes division of territory and practises mutual
        aggression and conflict.
           Now I have heard from the Ancient of the Sea,· that in the
        East there is a fair land encircled on all sides by blue mountains.
        Moreover, there is there one who flew down riding in a
        Heavenly Rock-boat. I think that this land will undoubtedly


       in this part of Japan, and I think it very probable that the first ]apanesewho
       settled here drove out a. population of Aino race.
         1 Primogeniture ,vas evidently not recognized in Japan at the time this

       story was written.
          2 i.e. Kiushiu.

          3 This is in imitation of the great number of years ascribed to the reigns

       of the early Chinese Inonarchs.
          • Shiho tsutsu no oji.
                                   JI!\f:\IU.                              I I I


be suitable for the extension of the Heavenly task,! so that its
glory should fill the universe. It is, doubtless, the centre of
the \vorld. 2 The person \vho fle\v do\vn was, I believe, Nigi-
haya-hi. 3 \Vhy should \ve not proceed thither, and make it the
capital? "
    All the Imperial Princes ans\vered, and said :-" The truth of
this is manifest. This thought is constantly' present to our
minds also. Let us go thither quickl~y." This \vas the year 111. 4.
Kinoye Tora (51st) of the Great Year.-l                             H.c.667.
    In that year, in ,"rinter, on the Kanoto Tori day (the 5th) of
the loth month, the ne\v moon of \\'hich \\Tas on the day Hinoto
 ~Ii, the Emperor in person led the Imperial Princes and a naval
force on an expedition against the East. \\lhen he arrived at
the Haya-suhi gate,' there \vas there a fisherman who came
riding in a boat. The Emperor summoned him, and then in-
quired of him, saY'ing :-" \\Tho art thou?" He answered and
said :-" Thy servant is a Country-God, and his name is Vtsu-
 hiko.7 I angle for fish in the bays of ocean. Hearing that
 the son of the Heavenl)' Deity \vas coming, therefore I forth-
 \\'ith came to receive him." Again he inquired of him, saying : -
 " Canst thou act as my guide? " He ans\vered and said: -" I
 \vill do so." The Emperor ordered the end of a pole of shihi
 ,vood s to be given to the fisher, and caused him to be taken
 and pulled into the Imperial vessel, of \vhich he \vas made pilot.

   1    i.e. for the further dC\'clopll1Cnt of the Ilnperial po\ver.
  2    The \\Torld is here the six quarters, N., S., E., \V., Zenith, Nadir. "fhis
is, of course, Chinese, as indeed is this whole speech.
   3 Nigi ..haya-hi Ineans soft-s\\·ift-sun.

   .. The great year is the Chinese cycle of sixty years. "[his system of
reckoning time is described in Legge's "Classics," Chahl1ers~ "Essay in
prolegolnena to Shooking," "Japanese Chronological "fables," by E.l\LS.,
Branlsen's "Chronological Tables,:' )1 ayers' " Chinese :\lanual," etc. I t ,vas
not in use to record years before the Christian era even in China, and could
hardly have been kno,,"n in Japan hefore the introduction of \vriting in the
5th century, A.T>. It is needless to add that such dates are, in this part of
the" Nihongi," purely fictitious.
    ~ The days of the month arc throughout the" N ihongi " given in this clunlsy
fashion. I have not thought it necessary to follo\v the example, except in
this one instance.
    f) The Quick-suck-gate or Bungo Channel, so called from its rapid tides.

     -; Rare-prince.                     8 Quercus cuspidata.
           112                               NIHONGI.

            A name was specially granted him, and he was called Shihi-ne-
III. 5.     tsu-hiko. 1 He was the first ancestor of the Yamato no Atahe.
              Proceeding on their voyage, they arrived at Usa 2 in the
            Land of Tsukushi. At this time there appeared the ancestors
           of the Kuni-tsu-ko 8 of Usa, named Usa-tsu-hiko and Usa-tsu-
           hime. They built a palace raised on one pillar 4 on the banks
           of the River Usa, and offered them a banquet. Then, by
           Imperial command, Usa-tsu-hime was given in marriage to the
           Emperor's attendant minister Ama no tane:) no Mikoto. Now
           Ama no tane no Mikoto was the remote ancestor of the
           Nakatomi Uji. 6
              11th month, 9th day. The Emperor arrived at the harbour
           of Oka 7 in the Land of Tsukushi.
   III. 6.    12th month, 27th day. He arrived at the province of Aki,
           where he dwelt in the Palace of Ye.
 R.C. 666.    The year Kinoto U, Spring, 3rd month, 6th day. Going
           onwards, he entered the land of Kibi,8 and built a tem-
           porary palace, in which he dwelt. It was called the Palace
           of Takashima. Three years passed, during which time he set
           in order the helms 9 of his ships, and prepared a store of pro-
           visions. It was his desire by a single effort to subdue the
           Empire.
 B.C. 663.    The year Tsuchinoye Muma, Spring, 2nd month, 11th day.
           The Imperial forces at length proceeded eastwards, the prow of
           one ship touching the stern of another. Just when they reached
           Cape Naniha they encountered a current of great swiftness.
           Whereupon that place was called Nami-haya (wave.swift) or

            1  Prine e of shihi root.
             2 Usa is DO\V a district (kori; in the province of Buzen. Tsukushi is used by
          old "'riters both for the ,vhole island of Kiushiu and for the northern part of it.
             3 Or Kuni no llliyakko, local hereditary nobles.
             4 Vide eh. K., p. 130, and "Night of the Gods," p. 224, where a curious

          coincidence with an Irish legend is noted. "In Mailduin's voyage he came
          to an island called Aenchoss, that is One-foot, so called because it was
          supported by a single pillar in the middle." The" Kojiki" and a note to
          the" Nihongi" have for one pillar, "one foot." Possibly there is here a
          reminiscence of a nomadic tent life.
             6 Heavenly seed.

            6 i.e. house, or noble fanlily.               '; In Chikuzen.
            8 Including the present provinces of Biten, Bittchiu, and Bingo.
             9 Or oars.
                                  JIMMU.                                  113

N ami-hana (wave-flower). It is no\v called Naniha, 1 which is
a corruption of this.
   3rd month, loth day. Proceeding upwards against the
stream, they went straight on, and arrived at the port of Awo-
kumo no Shira-date, in the township of Kusaka, in the province
of Kafuchi. 2                                                     III. 7.
   Sumnler, 4th month, 9th day. The Imperial forces in martial
array marched on to Tatsuta. The road was narrow and pre-
cipitous, and the men were unable to march abreast, so they
returned and again endeavoured to go eastward, crossing over
~Iount Ikoma.     In this way they entered the inner country.3
   N ow when N aga-sune-hiko 4 heard this, he said :-" The
object of the children of the Heavenly Deity in coming hither is
assuredly to rob me of m~y country." So he straightway leviedall
the forces under his dominion, and intercepted them at the Hill
of Kusaka. A battle was engaged, and Itsuse no Mikoto was hit
b:ya random arrow on the elbow. The Imperial forces were
unable to advance against the enemy". The Emperor was vexed,
and revolved in his inmost heart a divine plan, saying :-" I
am the descendant of the Sun-Goddess, and if I proceed
against the Sun to attack the enemy', I shall act contrary to the
way of Heaven. Better to retreat and make a show of weak-
ness. Then sacrificing to the Gods of Heaven and Earth, and
bringing on our backs the might of the Sun-Goddess, let us III. 8.
follow her rays and trample them down. If we do so, the
enemy will assuredly be routed of themselves, and we shall not
stain our swords with blood." They all said :-" It is good."
Thereupon he gave orders to the army, saying :-" Wait a
while, and advance no further." So he withdrew his forces.
and the enemy also did not dare to attack him. He then re-
tired to the port of Kusaka, where he set up shields, and made
a warlike show. Therefore the name of this port was changed
to Tatetsu,& which is now corrupted into Tadetsu.
   Before this, at the battle of Kusaka, there was a man who

  1 ~aniha is no\v a poetical name for Ohosaka.      The current referred to is
no doubt the tide on the bar at the river-mouth, a most dangerous place for
small craft in bad weather.
  2 Pronounced Kawachi.                     3 Yamato.

  4 Prince Longshanks.      N aga-sune is the nalne of a place.
  ;, Shield-port or shield-ferry.
        J26                         NIHO!\GI.

         hid in a great tree, and b}7 so doing escaped danger. So
         pointing to this tree, he said :-" I am grateful to it, as to my
         mother." Therefore the people of the day' called that place
         Orno no ki no M ura. t
            5th month, 8th day. The army arrived at the port of
         Yamaki in Chinn [also called j'>ort ITa1Jza 1tO zoiJ. Now Itsuse
         no Mikoto's arrow waun{l was extremely painful. He grasped his
         s\vord, and striking a martial attitude, said :-" How exaspera-
         ting it is that a ?1Zan should die of a wound received at the
         hands of slaves, and should not revenge it !" The people of that
 Ill. 9. day therefore called the place \Vo no minato.~
            Proceeding onwards, they reached Mount Kama in the Land
         of Kil, where Itsuse no Mikoto died in the army, and \vas
         therefore buried at Mount Kama.
            6th month, 23rd day. The army arrived at the village of
         Nagusa, where they put to death the Tohe J of Nagusa. Finally
         they crossed the moor of Sano, and arrived at the village of
         I(ami <I in Kumano. Here 11e embarked in the rock-boat of
         Heaven, and leading his army, proceeded onwards by slow
         degrees. In the midst of the sea, they suddenly filet with a
         violent wind, and the Imperial vessel was tossed about. Then
         Ina-ihi no Mikoto exclaimed and said :-" Alas! my ancestors
         were Heavenly Deities, and my mother was a Goddess of the
         Sea. Why do they harass me by land, and ,vhy moreover do
         they harass me by sea?" When he had said this, he drew
         his sword and plunged into the sea, ,vhere he became changed
         into the God Sabi-mochi.;)
III. 10.    Mike Irino no Mikoto, also indignant at this, said:-
          "My mother and my aunt are both Sea-Goddesses: \\rhy
          do they raise great billows to overwhelm us?" So treading
          upon the waves, he went to the Eternal Land. 6 The Emperor
         was now alone with the Imperial Prince Tagishi-mimi no
          Mikoto. Leading his army forward, he arrived at Port
          Arazaka in Kumano [also called Nishiki BaJ/J, where he put to
         death the Tohe of Nishiki. At this time the Gods belched up

         1 -Mother-tree-village.            2 Port Man (vir).
         3 Tohe seems to have been a word for chieftain.
         4 Or it may be of the Deity of Kumano.

         a i.e. the blade.holder.           G Toko-yo no Kuni.
                                  JI!\1!\1U.                              115

a poisonous vapour, from which everyone suffered. For this
reason the Imperial arnlY was again unable to exert itself.
Then there was there a man by name Kumano no Takakuraji,
\\rho unexpectedl~y had a dream, in which Ama-terasu no Oho-
kami spoke to Take-mika-tsuchi no Kami,t saying :-" I still
hear a sound of disturbance from the Central Land of Reed-
Plains. Do thou again go and chastise it." Take-mika-tsuchi
no Kami answered and said :-" Even if I go not, I can send
do\\'n my sword, with which I subdued the land, upon \vhich the
country \vill of its own accord become peaceful." To this
 Ama-terasll no Rami assented. Thereupon Take-mika-tsuchi
no Kami addressed Takakuraji, saying :-" My s\V'ord, which
is called FutSll no Mitama, I will now place in thy storehouse.
 Do thou take it and present it to the Heavenly Grandchild." III. II.
Takakuraji said "Yes," and thereupon awoke. The next
lllorning, as instructed in his dream, he opened the storehouse,
and on looking in, there was indeed there a s\vord which had
fallen do\vn (from Heaven), and was standing upside down 2 on
the plank floor of the storehouse. So he took it and offered
 it to the Emperor. At this time the Emperor happened to be
asleep. He awoke suddenly, and said :-" What a long time
 I have slept!" On inquiry he found that the troops who had
 been affected by the poison had all recovered their senses and
were afoot. The Emperor then endeavoured to advance into
the interior, but among the mountains it was so precipitous
 that there was no road by \vhich they could travel, and they
wandered about not knowing- whither to direct their march.
Then Ama-terasu no Oho-kami instructed the Emperor in a
 dream of the night, saying :-" I will now send thee the Yata-
 garasu,a make it thy guide through the land." Then there did

  1  The l'hunder-God.                   2 i.e. point upwards.

  3  Yata-garasu. The Chinese characters used here mean " The crow with
a head eight feet long." But this is a case where we nlust put aside the
Chinese characters, and attend solely to the Japanese \vord \vhich they are
meant to represent. This is undoubtedly yata-garasu, as we kno\v from the
h Kojiki" and from the traditional Kana rendering. Mueh has been \vritten about

this bird by Motowori and other Shinto scholars, which is, I venture to think,
\vholly ,vide of the mark. The clue to its meaning is afforded by the" Wamio-
shu," a Chinese-Japanese vocabulary of the tenth century, which says, on the
 authority of the" Shiki," stillinore ancient comtuentaries on the " Njhonbrj~:'
        116                              NIHONGI.

         in'deed appear the Yata-garasu flying down from the Void.
         The Emperor said :-" The coming of this cro\v is in due
         accordance with my auspicious dream. How grand! How-
         splendid! My Imperial ancestor, Ama-terasu no Oho-kami,
         desires there\vith to assist me in creating the hereditary
         institution." 1
            At this time Hi no Omi 2 no Mikoto, ancestor of the Oho-
III. 12. tomo 8 House, taking with hirn Oho-kuIIle 4 as commander of
         the main body, guided by the direction taken by the crow,
         looked up to it and follo\\Ted after, until at length they arrived
         at the district of Lower U da. Therefore they named the
         place which they reached the village of Ukechi 5 in U da.

       that the Yang-wu or Sun-crow is in Japanese yata·garasu. 'fhe Yang-\vu is a
       bird \vith three clanrs, and ofa red colour, which, according to Chinese myth,
                                       inhabits the sun. If \ve accept this identifi-
                                       cation, the Ineaning of the epithet yata becolnes
                                       clear. It lneans eight hands, or, as ya in ancien t
                                       Japanese meant also many or several, many
                                        hands, a sufficiently accurate description for
                                        popular myth of the Yang-\Vll ,vith its three
                                       cla\\·s. The late M. 'Terrien de La-Couperie,
                                       in his "Western Origin of Early Chinese
                                       Civilization," says that "the first allusion to
                                       the three-legged crow supposed to roost in
                                       the sun occurs in the " Li Sao" of Kiii.. yuen,
                                       the poet of Ts'u, 314 B.C. in China. A three-
                                       legged bird in various forms was figured on
                                       coins of Pamphylia and Lycia of older times.
                                       Comte Goblet d'Alviella has reproduced SOlne of
                                       thenl in his interesting work on " La Migration
                                       des Symboles," 1891, p. 222. See a paper on
                  Sun-crow.            the Hi no marllin "T.A.S.J.," Vol. XXII., p. 27,
                                       and 'eh. K., p. 136. The guidance of con-
       -querors or colonists to their destination by a supernatural bird Qr beast
       is a falniliar feature of old-world story. See Lang, "Custom and Myth,"
        II ,71.
           1 'The sovereignty.                2 Hi Ineans sun; Omi, minister.

          ;j Oho-t01110 Ineans " great companion."     The Oho-tomo were the Inlperial
       guards.
          4 Oho.kulne, as Chamberlain points out, probably means sitnply a great

       force. But when the" Kojiki "and ,- Nihongi" were written, this Ineaning
        \vas forgotten, and it was supposed to be a Inan's name.
           ;) U gatsu Ineans to pierce, and the name was given because they penetrated
       the 1110untains to this place. All these derivations are very fanciful.
                                JIM~IU.                              (, 7

   At this time, by an Imperial order, he commended Hi no
Omi no Mikoto, sayin.g :-" Thou art faithful and brave, and
art moreover a successful guide. Therefore will I give thee a
new name, and will call thee Michi no Omi." 1
   Autumn, 8th month, 2nd day. The Emperor sent to
summon Ukeshi the Elder and Ukeshi the Younger. These
two were chiefs of the district of Uda. Now Ukeshi the
Elder did not come. But Ukeshi the Younger came, and
making obeisance at the gate of the camp, declared as
follows :-" Thy servant's elder brother, Ukeshi the Elder,
shows signs of resistance. Hearing that the descendant of
Heaven was about to arrive, he forthwitl: raised an army with
which to make an attack. But having seen from afar the might
of the Imperial army, he was afraid, and did not dare to oppose
it. Therefore he has secretly placed his troops in ambush, and
has built for the occasion a new palace, in the hall of which
he has prepared engines. It is his intention to invite the
Emperor to a banquet there, and then to do him a mischief.
I pray that his treachery be noted, and that good care be taken III. 13.
to make preparation against it." The Emperor straightway
sent Michi no Omi no Mikoto to observe the signs of his
opposition. Michi no Omi no Mikoto clearly ascertained his
hostile intentions, and being greatly enraged, shouted at him
in a blustering manner :-" Wretch! thou shalt thyself dwell
in the house ,vhich thou hast made." So grasping his sword,
and drawing his bow, he urged him and drove him within it.
Ukeshi the Elder being guilty before Heaven, and the matter
not admitting of excuse, of his own accord trod upon the
engine and was crushed to death. His body was then brought
out and decapitated, and the blood which flo\\·ed from it
reached above the ankle. Therefore that place was called
 Uda no Chi-hara. 2 After this Ukeshi the Younger prepared a
great feast of beef and sake':l with which he entertained the
  1  The Minister of the Road.             2 The bloody plain of Uda.

  3  \Ve might be inclined to infer from this (what was probably the case)
that the Ancient Japanese lived more on animal food than their descendants
in modern times. But there- is much room for suspicion that this statement
 s nothing more than a reminiscence of a passage in a history of the Later
Han dynasty of China, which speaks of beef and sake being presented to
 the Emperor Kwang Wu Ti, who came to the throne A.D. 25.
            I 18                           NIHONGI.

            .Imperial arm~y. The Emperor distributed this flesh and sake
             to the conlmon soldiers, upon which they sang the following
             verses : -
                                  In the high   f~:es:le 1
                                                        of Uda
                                 I set a snare for woodcock,
                                 And waited,
                                 But no woodcock catne to it ;
II l. 14.                        A valiant \vhale canle to it. 1
                                 •          •          •           •
                                 *          •          •           •
            This is called a Kume 2 song. At the present time, when the
         Department of Music performs this song, there is still the:J
         measurement of great and small by the hand, as ,veIl as a
         distinction of coarse and fine in the notes of the voice. This
         is by a rule handed do\\~n from antiquity.
            After this the Ernperor wislled to inspect the Land of
         Yoshino, so taking personal command of the light troops, he
III. 15· made a progress round by way of Ukechi mura in Uda.
            When he came to Yoshino, there was a man who came out
         of a ,veIl. He shone, and had a tail. The Emperor inquired
         of him, saying :-" What man art thou?" He answered and
         said :-" Thy servant is a local Deity, and his name is Wi-
         hikari."·1 He it is who was the first ancestor of the Yoshino no
         Obito. Proceeding a little further, there was another man
         with a tail, who burst open a rock and came forth from it. The
          Emperor inquired of him, saying :-" What man art thou?"
          He answered and said :-" Thy servant is the child of Iha-oshi-
               1 Ki in the first line of this poeul Ineans probably both tree and castle.

            The \vords are put into the mouth of Ukeshi the Elder, who found a whale
            (the Emperor) in his springe instead of the barmless woodcock he expected.
            The \vild boar is now called the yama..kujira or mountain-whale, and is
            perhaps the animal intended here.
               I confess that I can make no satisfactory sense of the remainder of this
            poem. The version given by Chamberlain (Ch. K., p. 140), following Moribe,
            is as good as any, but it seeU1S to me very conjectural. It should be noted,
            ho\vever, that this part of the poem contains an indication of the polygamous
            customs of the Japanese at this time in the use of two \\'ords signify-
            ing respectively elder \vife (konami) and younger \\,ife (uhanari). The
            " Nihongi" omits the interjectional refrain given in the " Kojiki.~'
               : Kume means no doubt" soldier" in this passage.
               3 Beating tilne is perhaps meant.           4 Well-brightness.
                                     JIMMU.                                    119

wake." 1 It is he who \vas the first ancestor of the Kuzu 2 of
Yoshino.
  Then skirting the river, he proceeded westward, when there
appeared another Ulan, who had made a fish trap and was
catching fish. On the Emperor making inquiry of him, he
answered and said :-" Thy servant is the son of Nihe-motsu.~'~
He it is who \vas the first ancestor of the U -kahi of Ata. 4
   9th month, 5th day. The Emperor ascended to the peak of
Mount Takakura in Ucla, whence he had a prospect over all Ill. 16.
the land. On Kuni-mi a Hill there were descried eighty
bandits. Moreover at the acclivity of Me-zaka 6 there was
posted an army of women, and at the acclivity of Wo-zaka 7
there was stationed a force of men. At the acclivity of Sumi..
zaka H was placed burning charcoal. This was the origin of
the names Me-zaka, Wo-zaka and Sumi-zaka.
   Again there ,vas the arn1Y of Ye-shiki,9 which covered all the
village of Ihare. All the places occupied by the enemy 10
were strong positions, and therefore the roads \vere cut off and
obstructed, so that there was no room for passage. The
Emperor, indignant at this, made prayer on that night in
person, and then fell asleep. The Heavenly Deity appeared to
him in a dream, and instructed him, saying :-" Take earth
from within the shrine II of the Heavenly Mount Kagu, and of it
make eighty Heavenly platters. Also make sacred jars 12 and lIt 17.
therewith sacrifice to the Gods of Heaven and Earth. More-
over pronounce a solemn imprecation. If thou doest so, the

   1   Rock-push.divide.
  =:   Kuzu were local chiefs. They are mentioned again in Ojin's reign.
     3 Food-holder or purveyor.

     4 U -kahi means cormorant-keepers.             Fishing \vith cormorants 15 still
practised in Japan.
  :j   Land-view.                             I) Wonlen's acclivity.

    -; Men's acclivity. The terms Me-zaka and Wo-zaka are no\\' applied to
two roads or stairs leading up to the same place, one of \\7hich (the wOlllen's)
 is less precipitous than the other.
     ~ Sumi-zaka means charcoal acclivity.
     9 Shiki the Elder.                       10 Lit. Robber-slaves or prisoners.

    11 A shrine, like a tempillm, might be merely a consecrated plot of ground.

 Kagu-yanla is a lnountain in Yamato.
    1: Idzube. The platters \vere for rice, the jars for sake. See Sato\\"s
 ~, Rituals" in " J.A.S.T .,': VI I., ii., p. 109-
                                                                         K
       120                            NIHONGI.

         enemy ,viII render submission of their own accord." The
         Emperor received with reverence the directions given in his
         dream, and proceeded to carry them into execution.
            Now Ukeshi the Younger again addressed the Emperor,
         saying :-" There are in the province of Yamato, in the village
         of Shiki, eighty Shiki bandits. Moreover, in the village of
         Taka-wohari [solne say Katsuraki] there are eighty Akagane 1
         balldits. All these tribes intend to give battle to the Emperor,
         and thy servant is anxious in his own mind on his account.
         It were now good to take clay from the Heavenl~y.. Mount
         Kagu, and therewith to make Heavenly platters with which to
         sacrifice to the Gods of the Heavenly shrines and of the Earthly
         shrines. If after doing so, thou dost attack the enemy, they
         may be easily driven off." The Emperor, who had already
         taken the words of his dream for a gnod omen, when he now
         heard the words of Ukeshi the Younger, was still more pleased
         in his heart. He caused Shihi-netsu-hiko 2 to put on ragged
         garments and a grass hat, and to disguise himself as an old man.
         He also caused Ukeshi the Younger to cover himself \vith a
         winnowing tray, so as to assume the appearance of an old
         woman, and then addressed them, saying :-" Do ye two pro--
         ceed to the Heavenly Mount Kagu, and secretly take earth from
         its summit. Having done so, return hither. By means of
         you I shall then divine whether my undertaking will be
         successful or not. Do your utmost and be watchful."
III. 18.    Now the enemy's army filled the road, and made all passage
         impossible. Then Shihi-netsu-hiko prayed, and said :-" If it
         will be possible for our Emperor to conquer this land, let the
         road by which we must travel become open. But if not, let
         the brigands surely oppose our passage." Having thus spoken
         they set forth, and went straight onwards. Now the hostile
         band,. seeing the t\\70 men, laughed loudly, and said :-" What
         an uncouth old man and old woman!" So with one accord
         they left the road, and allowed the two men to pass and proceed
         to the mountain, where they took the cla)r and returned with
         it. Hereupon the Emperor was greatly pleased, and with this

         1 Akagane means red Inetal, i.e. copper, but the text is doubtful.   The
       " Kiujiki" has a different reading.
         :! See abo\"e, p. I I I.
                                    JI:t\I~I U.                              121

cla}r he made eighty platters, eighty Heavenly small jars and
sacred jars; with which he went up to the upper waters of the
River Nifu and sacrificed to the Gods of Heaven and of Earth.
Immediately, on the Asa-hara plain by the river of Uda, it
became as it \vere like foam on the water, the result of the curse
cleaving to them.~
   M'oreover the Emperor went on to utter a vow, saying :-" I
will now make ames in the eighty platters without using water.
If the arne is formed, then shall I assuredly \\Tithout effort and
without recourse to the might of arms reduce the Empire to
peace." So he made atTIe, which forthwith became fcrmed of
Itself. 4
   Again he made a VO\V, saying :-" I will no\v take the sacred
jars and sink them in the River Nifu. If the fishes, whether
great or snlall, become everyone drunken and are carried down
the stream, like as it \-vere to floating maki a leaves, then shall
I assuredl)~ succeed in establishing this land. But if this be
not so, there will never be any result." Thereupon he sank III. 19-
the jars in the river with their mouths downward. After a
while the fish all came to the surface, gaping and gasping as
they floated down the stream. Then Shihi-netsu-hiko, seeing
this, represented it to the Emperor, who was greatl~y rejoiced,
and plucking up a five-hundred-branched masakaki tree of the
   1 The reader \vho \\'ishes to realize what the ancient pottery of Japan was

like should visit the British Museum and inspect the Go\vland collection.
There is also a collecti~n in the Uyeno Museulu in Tokio. Ninaga\va
Noritane's \vork entitled" K\van-ko-dzu-setsu" gives very good dra\vings of
ancient pottery. The COlnmon Japanese name for this \yare is Giogi-yaki,
Giogi being the name of a Buddhist priest \vho lived 67°-749, and who is
credited \vith the invention of the potter's wheel. But the \vheel \vas cer-
tainly kno\vn in Japan long before his time. This very passage contains an
evidence of this fact. 130th the Chinese characters and the Japanese \vord
ta-kujiri given in the ancient comlnelltary for the small jars here mentioned
luean "hand-made," leading to the conclusion that this ,vas exceptional.
 Indeed, nearly all the pottery of the N ihongi period \vhich has come do\\'n to
us is ",·heel-made.
   ~ Foam on water is a fa\'ourite emblen1 of the transitoriness of human
life.
    3 Anle (sweetness) is usually Blade of lnillet, malted, and is nearly identical

 in cOluposition with \vhat Ollr chemists call" lualt extract." I t is a favourite
 S\\1eetnleat in the far East.
    4 Cf. Judges \.j. 36.              :1 Podocarplls Inacrophylla.
       122                              NIHONGI.

         upper waters of the River Nifu, he did worship therewith to all
         the Gods. It was with this that the custom began of setting
         sacred jars. 1
           At this time he commanded Michi no Omi no Mikoto, say-
         ing :-" We are now in person 2 about to celebrate a public 3
         festival to Taka-mi-n1usubi no Mikoto, and I appoint thee
         Ruler of the festival, and grant thee the title of Idzu-hime. 4
         The earthen jars which are set up shall be called the Idzube
         or sacred jars, the fire shall be called Idzu no Kagu-tsuchi or
         sacred-fire-elder, the water shall be called Idzu no Midzu-ha
         no me or sacred.water-female, the food shall be called Idzu-
         uka no me or sacred-food-female, the firewood shall be called
         Idzu no Yama-tsuchi or sacred-mountain-elder, and the grass
         shall be called Idzu no No-tsuchi or sacred-moor-elder."
III. 20.    Winter, loth month, 1st day. The Emperor tasted & the
         food of the Idzube, and arraying his troops set forth upon his
         march. He first of all attacked the eighty bandits at Mount
         Kunimi, routed and slew them. It was in this campaign that
         the Em-peror, fully resolved on victory, made these verses,
       sayIng : -
                              Like the Shitada.Illi
                              Which creep around
                              The great rock
                              Of the Sea of Ise
                              "'There blows the divine wind -
                              Like the Shitadami,
                              My boys! my boys!
                              We \vill creep around,
                              And smite them utterly,
                              And snl1te them utterly.6

         1   A note says that they \\Tere set up in the courtyard.
         2   The Mikado deputed most of his priestly fl1ncti~ns to the Nakatomi.
         3 The ancient comnlentary gives the Japanese ,vord utsushi, i.e. manifest,
       Visible. This suggests that there ,vas a distinction between esoteric and
       exoteric in the Shinto rites of this time.
         4 Idzu.hinle nleans dread or sacred princess.     The" l'susho v COll1mentator
       says that the persons entrusted with this function \vere usually WOlnen, as may
       be seen in the case of the priestesses of Ise, Kall1o, and Kasuga. But as no
       women ",'ere available at this time, Michi-no-Olni \vas given a felninine title
       for the occasion.
          /) The interlinear Kana has tatenlatsuri, i.e. offered. The reference is to
       the feast of Nihiname described above. See p. 86.
          6 The shitadami is a s111all shell of the tl1rbinid~ class.  I ts introduction
                                   JIMl\1U ..                            12 3

    In this poem, by the great rock IS intended the Hill of
 K.unimi.
   .L-\fter this the band which remained was still numerous, and
 their disposition could not be fathomed. So the Emperor
 privately commanded ~Iichi no Omi no Mikoto, say'ing :-" Do
 thou take with thee the Oho-kume, and make a great muro at
the village of Osaka: Prepare a copious banquet, invite the
enemy to it, and then capture them." Michi no Omi no
 Mikoto thereupon, in obedience to the Emperor's secret behest,
dug a muro at Osaka, and having selected his bravest soldiers,
stayed therein mingled \vith the enemy. He secretly arranged
with them, saying :-" \Vhen they have got tipsy \vith sake,
I will strike up a song. Do you, when you hear the sound of
my song, all at the same time stab the enemy'."          Having III. 21.
made this arrangement they took their seats, and the drinking-
bout proceeded. The enemy, unaware that there was any plot,
abandoned themselves to their feelings, and promptly became
intoxicated. Then Michi no Omi no Mikoto struck up the
follo\ving song : -
                      At Osaka
                       In the great nluro- house,
                      'Though 111en in plenty
                      Enter and stay,
                      We the gloriolls
                      Sons of \varriors,
                      Wielding our nlallet-heads.
                      Wielding our stone-mallets,
                      \Vill slllite thell1 utterly. ~

   ~ow when our troops heard           this song, they all drew at the

here does not seem very appropriate. Perhaps the lneaning is " in nUlnber
like the turbinidce." Cf. Ch. K., p. 143. The" Shukai "editor thinks that the
shitadami represent the bandits. The great rock is, perhaps, the :\tiyoto-
seki at Futami, so often represented in Japanese pictures. See Anderson~s
Catalogue, p. 320, or Satow and Ha\ves Handbook, p. ISO.
                                         J



   I In Yalnato.   To be distinguished frolll the city of Ohosaka.
   2 The muro-ya is a pit-d\velling (see above, p. 71).   The poem speaks of
mallet-heads, but the text \vhich follows of lllallet-headed s\vords. I ha\"e
little doubt that the former is the true phrase, and that stone weapons are
referred to. The stone-lnalJets are unmistakably the \veapons figured above
(p. 87). The Inallet-heads and stone-lllallets are perhaps the saine thing
under differen t names.
      12 4                             NIHONG(.

      same time tlleir mallet-headed swords, and simultanously sle\\1'
      the enemy, so that there were no eaters left. 1 The Imperial
      army \vere greatl~y delighted; they looked up to Heaven and
      laughed. Therefore he made a song, saying : -
                             Though folk say
                             That one Yemishi
                             Is a match for one hundred men,
                             They do not so much as resist. 2

       The practice according to which at the present time the
      Kume sing this and then laugh loud, had this origin.
       Again he sang, saying:-
                                  Ho ! now is the tilne ;
                                  Ho! now is the time;
                                  Ha! Ha! Psha!
                                  Even now
                                  My boys!
                                  Even no,v
                                  My boys 13

           All these songs were sung in accordance with the secret
         behest of the Emperor. He had not presumed to compose
Ill. 22. them of his own motion.
           Then the Emperor said :-" It is the part of a good general
         ,vhen victorious to avoid arrogance. The chief brigands have
         now been destroyed, but there are ten bands of villains of a
         similar stamp, who are disputatious. Their disposition cannot

        1  That is, none were left ali \'c.
           The Yemishi are the Ainos, or more correctly Ainus, of whom a relnnant
      of SOUle ten thousand souls now inhabit the island of Yezo. When the
      " Nihongi " \-vas ,vritten they still occupied a large part of the main island of
      Japan, and in earlier times, as ,ve gather from the evidence of place-names
      (See Chamberlain's Essay published by the Inlperial University), they ex.
      tended ,vest even of Yamato. But it ,"ould not be safe to draw any con·
      elusion from their mention in this poeln. 'lhe writer of the" Nihongi " is in the
      habit of fitting ancient poetry into his narrative in a very arbitrary nlanner.
      The" Kojiki " omits it. Yemishi or Yebisu is also applied to barbarous tribes
      generally, and this is probably its primary llleaning. It ought, perhaps, to
      be added to the group of onolnatopoetic ,vords ending in su or shi, mentioned
      at p. 65, the b or In having the same function as these letters in the ,,'ords
      barbarian, babble, murlnur, etc. See Index-Yemishi..
         ~ Nothing could ,veIl be Dl0re prilnitive than this. The l11etre is irregular,
      and, like all Japanese poetry, there is no rhyme, quantity or regular recur-
      rence of accent to distinguish it froln prose.
                                    JIMMU.                                 12   5
be ascertained. Why should we ren1ain for a long time in one
place? By so doing we could not have control over emer-
gencies." So he removed his camp to another place.
    11th month, 7th day. The Imperial army proceeded in great
force to attack the Hiko 1 of Shiki. F'irst of all the Emperor
sent a messenger to summon Shiki the Elder, but he refused to
obey. Again the Yata-garasu was sent to bring- hinl. When
the crow reached his camp it cried to him, saying- :-" The
child of the Heavenly Deity sends for thee. Haste! haste!"
Shiki the Elder \vas enraged at this, and said :-" Just when I
heard that the conquering Deity of Hea\"en \vas coming and
\vas indignant at this, why shouldst thou, a bird of the cro\v tribe,
utter such an abominable cry?" So he dre\v his bo\v and
aimed at it. The crow forthwith fled away, and next proceeded
to the house of Shiki the Younger, \vhere it cried, saying:-
"The child of the Heavenly Deity summons thee. Haste!
haste!" Then Shiki the Younger \vas afraid, and, changing
countenance, said :-" Thy servant, hearing of the approach of
the conquering Deity of Heaven, is full of dread morning and
evening. Well hast thou cried to me, 0 crow.'" He straight-
\vay made eight leaf-platters,~ on \vhich he disposed food, and
entertained the crow. Accordingly, in obedience to the cro\v,
he proceeded to the Emperor and informed hinl, saying :-" ~f~y
elder brother, Shiki the Elder~ hearing of the approach of the
child of the Heavenly Deity, forthwith assembled eighty bandits Ill. 23.
and provided arms, with \vhich he is about to do battle \vith
thee. It will be well to take measures against him \vithout delay."
The Emperor accordingly assembled his generals and inquired
of them, saying :-" It appears that Shiki the Elder has now
rebellious intentions. I summoned him, but again he will not
come. What is to be done?" The generals said :-" Shiki
the Elder is a crafty knave. I t will be ,veIl, first of all, to send
 Shiki the Younger to make matters clear to hilll, and at the
same time to make explanations to Kuraji the Elder and
 Kuraji the Younger. If after that they still refuse submission,
 it will not be too late to take warlike measures against them."
 Shiki the Younger \vas accordingly sent to explain to them

    I    Princes.
    :l   ()r trays, Inade of the leaves of Kashiha, a kind of evergreen oak.
       J26                              NIHONGI.

        their interests. But Shiki the Elder and the others adhered to
        their foolish design, and would not consent to submit. Then
        Shi'hi-netsu-hiko advised as follows :-" Let us first se'nd out
        OUf feebler troops by the Osaka road.     When the enemy sees
        them he will assuredly proceed thither with all his best troops.
        We should then straightway urge forward our robust tro.ops,
        and make straight for Sumi-zaka. 1 Then with the water of the
        River Uda \\7e should sprinkle the burning charcoal, and
        suddenly take them unawares, when they cannot fail to be
        routed." The Emperor approved this plan, and sent out the
        feebler troops towards the enemy, who, thinking that a power-
        ful force was approaching, awaited them with all their power.
        Now up to this time, whenever the Imperial army attacked,
        they invariably captured, and when they fought they were
        invariably victorious, so that the fighting men were all wearied
111.24. out. The,refare the Emperor, to comfort the hearts of his
        leaders and men, struck off this verse : -
                              As we fight,
                              Going forth and watching
                              From between the trees
                              Of Mount Inasa,
                              We are fan1ished.
                              Ye keepers of corluorants
                              (Birds of the island),
                              Come no,v to our aid. 2

         In the end he crossed Sumi-zaka with the stronger troops,
       and, going round by the rear, attacked them from two sides
       and put them to the rout, killing their chieftains Shiki the
       Elder and the others.
         12th month, 4th day. The Imperial army at length attacked
       Naga-sune-hiko and fought with him repeatedly, but was
       unable to gain the victory. Then suddenly the sky became
       overcast, and hail fell. There appeared a wondrous kite of a
       golden colour which came flying and perched on the end of
       the Emperor's bow. The lustre of this kite was of dazzling

         1  The charcoal acclivity.
         2  The metre is nearly regular naga-uta, ,vhich consists of alternate lines of
       five and seven syllables, with an additional line of seven syllables at the
       end. The corlnorant-keepers ,vere appealed to to supply fish for the army's
       food.
                                   JIM~IU.                              12   7
brightness, so that its appearance was like that of lightning.
In consequence of this all Naga-sune-hiko's soldiers were
dazzled and be\\Tildered so that they could not fight stoutly~. III. 25.
   N agasune ,vas the original name of the village, whence it
became the name of a man. But in consequence of the
Imperial arm~y obtaining the favourable omen of the Kite, the
men of that time called it Tobi no mura. 1 It is now called
Tomi, which is a corruption of this.
   Ever since Itsuse no l\1ikoto was hit by an arrow at the
battle of Kusaka and died, the Emperor bore this in mind, and
constantly' cherished resentment for it. On this campaign it
was his desire to put all to death, and therefore he composed
these verses, saying : -
                        My Inouth tingles
                        With the ginger planted
                        At the bottoln of the hedge
                        By the glorious
                        Sons of '''arriors-
                        I cannot forget it;
                        Let us slnite them utterly.
Again he sang, saying:-
                         I n the Inillet- field
                        Is one stein of odorous garlic :-
                        The glorious
                        Sons of \varriors
                        13inding its stem
                        And binding its shoots
                        \\7ill sOlite it utterly.

Then agaIn letting loose his army, he suddenly attacked him.
In general, all these songs composed by the Emperor are
termed kUl1ze uta, in allusion to the persons who took and sang
them.
   Now Naga-sune-hiko sent a foot-messenger, who addressed
the Emperor, saying :-" There was formerly a child of the

  1 Kite-village.
  2 "As the taste of ginger relnains in the mouth for a long time after it is
eaten, so do my feelings of resentment for my brother's death remain present
to my mind. I cannot forget it, so let us revenge it by destroying the enemy
utterly."
    The word for shoots is 11le, \\1hich also Ineans females. This is no
doubt intentional. Naga-sune-hiko is to be destroyed with all his family.
        J26                                NIHONGI.

         Heavenly Deity, who came down from Heaven to owe 11 here,
         riding in a Rock-boat of Heaven. l-lis name was Kushi-dama
         N igi-haya-hi no Mikoto. He took to wife my younger sister
111.26 Mi-kashiki.ya-bime 1 [also called ,lvaga-sune-hime, or TOlni-ya-
         hi'neJ' of wholn l1e at length had a child, named U mashi-ma-te~
         no Mikoto. Therefore did I take Nigi-haya-hi no Mikoto for my
         Lord, and did service to him. Can it be that there are two
         seeds of the children of the Heavenly Deity? Why should
         anyone else take the name of Child of the Heavenly Deity
         and therewith rob people of their dominions? I have pondered
         this in my heart, but have as yet failed utterly to believe it."
         The Emperor said :-" There are many other children of the
         Heavenly Deity. If he whom thou has taken as thy Lord were
         truly a child of the Heavenly Deity, there \vould be surely
         some object which thou couldst show to us by way of proof."
         Naga-sune-hiko accordingly brought a single Heavenly-
         feathered-arrow of Nigi-haya-hi no Mikoto, and a foot-quiver,"
         and exhibited them respectfully to the Emperor. The Emperor
         examined them, and said :-" These are genuine." Then in
         his turn he showed to Naga-sune-hiko the single Heavenly-
         feathered-arrow and quiver which he \vore. When N aga-sune-
          hiko saw the Heavenly token he became more and more em-
         barrassed. But the murderous weapons were already prepared,
         and things were in such a state that he "vas unable to pause in
          his career. Therefore he adhered to his nlisguided scheme,
         and would not alter his purpose.
             Nigi.. haya.hi no Mikoto, knowing from the first that the
          Heavep.ly Deity had simply generously bestowed the Empire
          on the Heavenly Grandchild, and that in view of the perverse
          disposition of N aga-sune it \\Tould be useless to instruct him
III· 27· l·n t'he relation of Heaven to ~Ian,o put him to death.  He then
          came with his army and made submission. The Emperor,
         who from the first had heard that Nigi-haya-hi no Mikoto had
         come down from Heaven, finding that he now had actually
          performed faithful service, accordingly praised him, and was
         gracious to him. He was the ancestor of the Mono no Be House.'i
         1   Three-cook.-house-princess.  \Vealth-house.
                                               2               3 S,veet..true-hand.

         4 A foot-soldier's quiver is meant.     :» i.e. of Lord and Vassal.
         6 The Mononobe were soldiers.    Here, however, the hereditary chiefs
       only are Ineant, the Mononobe no Muraji.
                                   JIMMU.                                  J26

  The year Tsuchi no to Hitsuji, Spring, 2nd month, 20th B.c,662.
day. The Emperor commanded his generals to exercise the
troops. At this time there were Tsuchi-gurno 1 in three places,
viz. :-The Tohe 2 of Nihiki at Tada no Oka-zaki 8 in the
district of Sofu, the Kose Hofuri at Wani no Saka-moto;l and
the \\'i-Hofuri;) at Hosonli no Nagara no Oka-zaki. All of these,
   1 Thc Tsuchi-gUll10 are luentioned in four or five passages of the

" Nihongi" and one passage of the Kojiki," all of \vhich belong to the
                                       H


highly legendary period of Japanese history. \Ve gather {rotn them that
the Tsuchi-gulno \vere usually, though not in,"ariably, outla\vs \vho defied the
Ilnperial authority. They had Japanese nalnes, and inhabited such long-
settled parts of Japan as Yaluato, Harilna, and even Kiushiu. There is
nothing, if \"e put aside the 111ention of Yetuishi at p. 124, to suggest that
they ,vere not of Japanese race. The" short bodies," etc., of the" N ihongi"
dcscription I takc to be nothing 1110rC than a product of the popular
ilnagination \vorking on the hint contained in the nanle Tsuchi-gumo, ,vhich
is literally" earth spider." SOlne etylnologists prefer the derivation ,vhich
connects kUI110 (or KU1JlO) \vith kOJJ10ri, to hide, thus Inaking tsuchi-gUll10
the " earth~hiders." But this is probably a distinction ,vithout a difference,
these t\\'o \\'ords containing the sanIC root, and the anilnal ,\'hich \ve call
the spider, i.c. spinncr, being in Japan tenned thc "hider," an epithet of
,vhich no one \vho has observcd its habits \vill dispute the appropriateness.
An ancient Japanese book says Tsuchi~gunlo is a 111ere nicknalue, to be
compared therefore \vith our clod-hopper or bog~trotter.
    In one of the passages above referred to, the Tsuchi-gulno are described
as inhabiting a rock-cave, but in others they arc said to live in Inuro or
pit-d\vellings, and this is obviously the origin of the natnc.
    'There arc several notices of Tsuchi-gumo in the ancient " Fudoki," or
"County Histories," but they are probably n1ere echoes of the older legends
related in the " Nihongi nand" Kojiki," and in any case they add nothing of
ilnportance to our infonnation about theln. It may be noted, however, that
Hiuga and Higo are mentioned in them as habitats of bands of these outla\vs.
   An all1using expansion by a 1110dern \\1riter of the spider conception of the
Tsuchi-gun10 ,,,ill be found at p. 140 of Anderson's B.1\tI. Catalogue. See
also eh. K., p. 141, and Index.
   A little \\'ork called" Kck-kio-ko," in a collection entitled" Haku-butsu-
so-sho," published by the Japanese Ilnperial l\luseum, has brought together
all the available infonnation respecting Muro and Tsuchi-gumo.
   2 Chiefs.

   3 Oka-zaki Ineans hill-spur, and is perhaps to be so understood here, and

not as a proper nalne.
   4 Saka-moto (acclivity bottom) ll1ay be also a description and not a proper

nalne.
   i Hofuri is a kind of Shinto priest.      I t is unlikely that persons not of
Japanese race should be so called.
       13°                               NIHONGI.

        trusting to their valour, refused to present themselves at Court.
        The Emperor therefore sent detachments separately, and put
         them all to death. There were, moreover, Tsuchi·gumo at the
         village of Taka-wohari, whose appearance \vas as follo\Jvs:-
         They had short bodies, and long arms and legs. They were
         of the same class as the pigmies. The Imperial troops wove
         nets of dolichos, which they flung over them and then slew
111.28. them. Wherefore the name of that village was changed to
         I{atsuraki. 1 It is in the land of Ihare. Its ancient name was
         !(ataru, or Katatachi. When our Imperial forces routed the
        enemy, a great army assembled and filled that country. Its
        name \vas accordingly changed to Ihare. 2
           Another account says that when the Emperor on a previous
        occasion tasted the food of the sacred jars, he moved forward
        his army on an expedition towards the West. At this time the
        eighty bandits of Katsuraki were encamped together there. A
        great battle with the Emperor followed, and they were at
        length destroyed by the Imperial arm:y. Therefore that place
        \vas called the village of Ihare.~ Again, the place where the
        Imperial troops made a warlike stand \\:as called Takeda. 4
        The place where he built a castle \vas named Kita.:> More-
        over, the place where the enemy fell in battle, their dead bodies
        prostrate, with their forearms for pillows, ,vas called Tsura-
        maki-da. 6
           TIle Emperor, in Autumn, the 9th month of the previous
        year, secretly took clay of the Heavenly Mount Kagu, with
        which he nlade eighty platters, and thereafter performing
        abstinence in person, sacrificed to all the Gods. He was
        thereby at length enabled to establish the \vorld 7 in peace.
        -Therefore he called the place where the clay was taken Hani-
        yasu. 8
        1   Dolichos Castle.
        :1  The interlinear Kana gives for "fill," ihalneri, a ,vord which I do not kno\v.
         3 The" original commentary n says that the Japanese \vord corresponding

      to the Chinese characters rendered" encan1p" is ihalni, a ,vord not other\vise
      known to me.
         .. Brave-field.          6 Castle·field.                6 Face-pillo\v-field.

         7 "\Vorld" is not quite a merely rhetorical expression for the En1pire of
      Japan. Hirata justifies Hideyoshi's invasion of Corea on the grounds that
      the sovereigns of Japan are de jure lords of the whole earth.
         H Clay-easy or clay-peace.
                                  JI~Il\IU.                              13 1
   3rd month, 7th day. The Emperor made an order/ say- III. 29.
ing :-" During the six years that our expedition against the
East has lasted, owing to my reliance on the Majesty of
Imperial I-Ieaven, the wicked bands have met death. It is
true that the frontier lands are still unpurified, and that a
remnant of evil is still refractory. But in the region of the
Central Land there is no more wind and dust. Trul~y we
should make a vast and spacious capital, and plan it great
and strong. ~
   At present things are in a crude and obscure condition, and
the people's minds are unsophisticated. They roost in nests
or dwell in caves.:~ Their manners are simply what is customary.
Now if a great man were to establish lavIs, justice could not
fail to flourish. And even if some gain should accrue to
the people, in what way would this interfere with the Sage's"
action? Moreover, it will be well to open up and clear the
mountains and forests, and to construct a palace. Then I may
reverently assume the Precious Dignity, and so give peace to III. 30.
my good subjects. Above, I should then respond to the
kindness of the Heavenly Po,vers in granting me the Kingdom,
and below, I should extend the line of the Imperial descendants
and foster rightmindedness. Thereafter the capital may be
extended so as to embrace all the six cardinal points, and the
eight cords may be covered so as to form a roof.~ Will this
not be \vell ?
   \Vhen I observe the Kashiha-bara r. plain, which lies

   1 This ,vhole speech is thoroughly Chinese in every respect, and it is

preposterous to put it in the mouth of an En1peror who is supposed to have
lived lTIOre than a thousand years before the introduction of Chinese learning
into Japan. The strange thing is that it is necessary to make this remark.
Yet there are still ,vriters ,\'ho regard this part of the "Nihongi" as
historical.
   ~ The Kana rendering is mi-araka, "an august shrine" or "an august
palace." This would imply a different reading,   m±   instead of ~.
   3 The reader lTIUst not take this as any evidence of the nlanners and

custolns of the Ancient Japanese. I t is simply a phrase suggested by the
author's Chinese studies.
   4 Meaning the Emperor's action.

   5 The character for roof ¥ also means the universe.       The eight cords,
or measuring tapes, silnply mean" every,,·here."
   G. Kashiha is an evergreen oak, the Quercus dentata.    Hara means plain.
        13 2                            NIHONGI.

        s.w. of Mount Unebi, it seems the Centre of the Land.                       I
           must set it in order."
              Accordingly he in this month commanded officers to set
           about the construction of an Imperial Residence.
B.C. 661,     Year Kanoye Saru, Autumn, 8th month, 16th day. The
           Emperor, intending to appoint a \yife, sought afresh 1
           children of noble fatnilies. N O\V there was a man who made
           representation to him, saying :-" There is a child \vho \vas
 III. 3 • born to Koto-shiro-nushi no Kami by his union with Tama-
        1

           kushi-hime, daughter of Mizo-kuhi-ni no Kami of Mishima.
           Her name is Hime-tatara-i-suzu-hime no Mikoto. She is a
           woman of remarkable beauty." The Emperor was rejoiced,
           and on the 24th day of the 9th Dlonth he received Rime-
          tatara-i-suzu-hime no Mikoto and made her his wife.
8.c.660.     Year Kanoto Tori, Spring, 1st month, 1st da)T. The
           Emperor assumed the Imperial Dignity in the Palace. of
          Kashiha-bara. This year is reckoned the first year of his
          reign. 2 He honoured his wife by making her Empress. The
          children born to him by her were Kami-ya-wi-mimi no ~fikoto
          and Kami-nunagaha mimi no Mikoto.
             Therefore 3 there is an ancient saying in praise of this, as
          follows :-" In Kashiha-bara in Unebi, he mightily established
          his palace-pillars on the foundation of the bottom-rock, and
 III. 32. reared aloft the cross roof-timbers to the Plain of High Heaven."


       This after\vards becalne a proper nanlC. Here it is perhaps Silllply a
       description.
          1 He had already a consort, but she ,vas apparently not considered a
       ,vife.
          2 Japanese History is often said to begin with this year. The fact is that
       nothing ,vhich really deserves the nanle of history existed for nearly a
       thousand years n1ore. This date is very much like that given for the
       foundation of Ronle by Romulus, B.C. 753. The very calendar by which the
       reckoning \vas Inade was not invented or kno\vn in Japan until Inany
       centuries after. See Bralnsen's " Chronological Tables," and" Early Japanese
       History" in " T.A.S.}."
          a As above reluarked, the author often introduces this word \vithout much
       reason.
          4 It \vas a mark of Shrines or Imperial Palaces to have the rafters at each

       end of the roof projecting upwards for several feet beyond the roof-tree,
       as in the illustration. These \vere called Chigi. See Ch. K., p. 3 1 I. Shinto
       te1nples at the present day are thus distinguished. What would those Japanese
                               JIl\I~fU.                         133
The name of the Emperor who thus began to rule the Empire
was Kami Yamato Ihare-biko Hohodemi."
   On the day on which he first began the Heavenly institution,
Michi no Omi no Mikoto, the ancestor of the Ohotomo House,
accompanied by the Oho-kume Be, \vas enabled, by means of
a secret device received from the Emperor, to use incantations
and magic formulre so as to dissipate evil influences. The use
of magic formulre had its origin from this.
   2nd year, Spring, 2nd month, 2nd day. The Emperor ascer- B.C. 659.
tained merit and dispensed rewards. To Michi no Omi no




                            Shrine at Ise.

Mikoto he granted a site for a house in \\Thich to dwell at the
village of Tsuki-zaka, thereby showing him special favour.
   Moreover, he caused the Oho-kume to dwell at a place on the
river-bank, west of Mount Unebi, now called Kume no nlura. 1
Such was the origin of this name. Utsu-hiko was made
Miyakko of the land of Yamato. Moreover, he gave to Ukeshi 111.33.
the younger the village of Takeda, constituting him· Agata-

Euhemerists ,,'ho think Takama ga hara (the Plain of High Heaven) to
be the name of a country, luake of this passage?
  1 i.e. the village of the kume or soldiers.
        134                              NIHONGI.

          nushi 1 of Takeda. He \yas the ancestor of the Mohi-tori 2 of
          Uda. Shiki the younger, \vhose personal name ,vas I{uro-haya,
          ,vas made Agata-nushi of Shiki. ~-foreover, he appointed a
          man called Tsune to be 11iyakko of the Land of I~atsuraki.
          '[he Yata-garasu ,vas also included in the ranks of those who
          received rewards. His descendants are the Agata-nushi of
           I~atsurano and the Tonomori 3 Be.
B.C. 657.    4th year, Spring, 2nd month, 23rd day. The Enlperor issued
          the follo\ving decree :-" The spirits of our Ilnperial ancestors
          reflecting their radiance do\vn from Heaven, illun1inate and
1 rT. 3+" assist us. All our enen1ies have now been subdued, and there
          is IJeace within the seas. \Ve ought to take advantage of this
          to perform sacrifice to the I-Ieavenly Deities, and there\vith
          develop filial duty."
             He accordingly established spirit-terraces amongst the Tomi
          hills, which \vere called I~an1i-tsu-\,·ono no I<aki-hara and
          Shin10-tsu· \vono no I\:aki-hara. -l l"'here he \vorshipped his
           Imperial ancestors, the Heavenly Deities.;)
P.c. 630.    31st year, Sumn1er, -I-th month, ]st day. The In1perial
          palanquin 6 Inade a circuit, in the course of which the Enlperor
          ascended the Hill Vlaki !(amu no Hotsuma. Here, having
          viewed the shape of the land on all sides, he said :-" Oh !
          what a beautiful country we have become possessed of!
          Though a blessed land of inner-tree-fibre/ yet it resen1bles a
          dragon-fly licking its hinder parts." From -this it first received
          the name of Akitsu-shima.~
          1     Ruler of district.
          2    The !vlohi-tori, after\\'ards l1l0ndori or l1l0ndo, ,,'ere originally the
        officials charged ,,,ith the ,vater supply of the Palace. The designation
        ::\Iondo no Kalni remained until quite recent tilnes.
           3 Tononl0ri, guardian of a palace or shrine.

            4 These naines luean respecti\'ely the Persinl11l0n plain of Upper Little-

        Uloor and the Persinl1110n plain of Lo\ver Little-nloor. The" spirit terraces"
        (a Chinese phrase) seenlS ll1eant for the plots of ground consecrated for
        Shinto \Yorship. See above, p. 81.
            5 The union of the offices of priest and king is to be noted all through this

        narrative.
             /) It is considered respectful to speak of the Inlperial car or palanquin
         ,vhen the Elnperor hiulself is lneant.
            '; The inner-tree-fibre is the inner bark of the paper mulberry, used for
        weaving into cloth. It is here an ornalnental epithet.
            S The real Ineaning of Aki-tsu-shin1a is the" region of haryests."       See
                                     JI~I~IU.                                135
   Of old, Izanagi no Mikoto, in naming this country, said : -
"Yamato is the Land of Ura-yasu: 1 it is the Land of Hoso-
hoko no Chi-taru : 2 it is the Land of Shiwa-Kami-Ho-tsu-ma." ~
   Afterwards Oho-namuchi no Oho-kami named it the Land III. 35.
of Tama-gaki no Uchi-tsu-kuni."
   Finally, when Nigi-hay'a-hi no Mikoto soared across the
Great Void in a Heaven-rack-boat, he espied this region and
descended upon it. Therefore he gave it a name and called it
Sora-mitsu-Yamato. fJ
   4 2n d year, Spring, 1st month, Jrd day. He appointed Prince B.C. 61 9.
Kami-nunagaha-mimi no I\fikoto Prince Imperial.
   76th year, Spring, 3rd month, 11th day. The Emperor died B.C. 585.
in the palace of Kashiha- bara. His age was then 127.6 The
following year, Autumn, the 12th day of the 9th month, he was
buried in the I\fisasagi j N.E. of !vIount Unebi.
above, p. 13. It has nothing to do \vith akitsu, the dragon-fly 'Ihis insect
may often be seen \vith its tail touching its luouth, so that its body forms a
ring. The appearance of the province of Yamato, which is a plain sur-
rounded by a ring of nlountains, suggested the silnile in the text. Later
historians have converted this into a cOlnparison of Japan to a dragon-fly
\\Tith outstretched \vings.
   t Bay-easy.    Explained to l1lean " which has peace \vithin its coasts."
   2 Slender-spears-thousand-good.      "\Vell supplied \vith weapons," say the
conlmentators.
   3 Rock-ring-upper-pre-enlinent-true (land).

   4 Jewel.fence-\vithin-land.

   5 Sky-sa\\y.Yamato.    J3ut Sora-lnitsu really means "that fills the sky," i.e.
that reaches to the farthest horizon. These names are luerely poetical
inventions. 'fhey \verc never in actual use.
   6 The" Kojiki " Inakes hiln 137.

   7 The Misasagi are still to be seen in large nun1bers in Japan, especially
in the Gokinai or five lnetropolitan provinces. They are particularly
numerous in Kahachi and Yamato.
   In the 1110st ancient times, say the Japanese antiquarians, the Misas3.gi or
tombs of the Mikados ,vere silnple lllounds. At some unkno"rn period,




                                 M isasagi, side view.

ho\vever, perhaps a few centuries before the Christian epoch, a highly
specialized fOfrn of tumulus caUle into use for this purpose, and continued
for several hundreds of years \\7ithout much change. It consists of t\VO
                                                                       L
 J26                           NIHONGI •

.mounds, one having a circular, the other a triangular base, merging into
 each other after the manner shown in the illustration, the whole being
 surrounded by a moat, or sometilnes by two concentric moats with a narrow
 strip of land bet,veen. The interment took place n the circular mound, the
 other probably serving as a platform on which were performed the rites in
 honour of the deceased. Seen from the side the appearance is that of a
 saddle-hill, the circular mound being some\vhat higher than the other.
 There are sometimes two smaller mounds at the base of the larger ones,
filling up the angle where they meet. The slope of the tumulus is not




                          Ground plan of Misasagi.

regular, but is broken up by terraces, on which are placed in ro~'s, a few
incbes apart, curious cylinders made of baked clay shaped in a mould, and
measuring from I to 2 feet in height, and from 6 to 14 inches in diameter.
They are buried in the earth, their upper rims being just level with the
surface.
  In some, perhaps in most cases, the Misasagi contains a large vault of
great unhewn stones withollt mortar. The walls of the vault converge
                                    JIMMU.                                   137
gradually to\vards the top, \vhich is roofed in by enorlnous slabs of stone
\veighing luany tons each. The entrance ,vas by Ineans of a gallery roofed
\vith sin1ilar stones.
    Sarcophagi of stone or pottery have been found in S011le Misasagi.
    The above description is quoted fronl an article by the present writer in
Chalnberlain~s "Things Japanese." I \vould ask travellers in China and
Corea to con1pare ",ith it any ancient tUInuli \vhich they 111ay discover in
those countries.
    I learn froln Mr. W. Go\vland, ,vho has visited the spot recognized officially
as the l\lisasagi of JinltllU Tenno, that there are here t,,,,o enclosures, the
inner of \vhich contains t\VO low tllounds each about 18 feet in dialneter and
2 feet in height.       A Chokushi or Imperial Envoy visits this Misasagi annu-
ally on the 3rd . .~pril with offerings of products of l1lountain, river, and sea,
viz., tahi, carp, sea-\veed, salt, water, sake, mochi (a preparation of rice),
\\'arabi (fern flour ?), pheasants and \\,ild ducks.
   The site of ]inlluu's tOlnb is a question even ,vith Japanese antiquaries,
and European scholars Inay be pardoned if they arc sOlne,vhat sceptical
         .
a b out It.   T   J
              y Ztle
            /7"      ,. S
                      .... an-flO-S      lJ.II I';\:
                                . 111." (I'          ±) p. 9·
                                                ~ 11:&"
                                    BOOK IV.

                     THE EMPEROR        KAMI-~UNAGAHA-~1IMI.



                              (SUIZEJ TENNO.I)

     THE Emperor I(ami-N unagaha-mimi was the third child of the
       Emperor Kami-Yamato-Ihare-biko Hohodemi. His nl0ther's
       name was Hime-tatara-Isuzu no Mikoto, the eldest daughter of
       Koto-shiro-nushi no Kami.
         This Emperor \vas of distinguished manners and appearance.
       As a child he possessed the vigour of manhood; when he gre,v
       to manhood, his form was gigantic. He excelled in warlike
       accomplishments, and his will ,vas resolute in the extreme.
IV. 2.    \Vhen he reached the age of fort~y-eight, the Emperor Kami-
       Yamato-Ihare-biko died. Now Kama-Nunagaha-mimi no
       Mikoto's disposition \vas profoundly filial, and his grief and
       longing knew no bounds. He made the funeral cerenlonies
       his especial care.
          His elder half-brother,2 Tagishi-mimi no Mikoto, ,vas no\v
       advanced in years, 3 and had a long experience of matters of

        ) This book contains the reigns of eight en1perors, and covers a period of
     483 years, giving an average of over sixty years for each reign. This is far
     too much for real history, especially \vhen \\'e consider the ages to \vhich
     these sovereigns are said to have reached. Kosho lived to the age of 114,
     Koan to 137, and so on. 1\lost of it is not even legendary. The account of
     the period previous to the accession of Suizei seen1S to contain a genuine
     ancient tradition, but the rest is plainly fictitious and the invention of some
     one imbued \vith Chinese ideas.
         Kalni Ineans upper or lord; Nunagaha is the nan1e of a river; luimi
     means august body.
        Suizei Ineans quiet, tranquil.
        2 The ''lord employed indicates that the n10ther of this prince ,vas not of

     full rank, but there is no such stiglna as is implied by our \vord " bastard."
        3 As he \"as present \vith his younger brother at a council held by the
     Eluperor Jinllnu before starting on his expedition to the East, B.C. 667, "oe
                                   SUlZEr.                                 139
state. Therefore he was again charged vvith the conduct of
affairs, and the Emperor treated him as an intimate friend. This
prince, however, was of a perverse disposition, and his natural
bent \vas opposed to justice. During the period of sincere
seclusion 1 his authority at last became independent, and con-
cealing his malicious purposes, he plotted the destruction of
his two younger brothers.
   Now in the year Tsuchinoto U of the cycle, Winter, the
11th month, Kami-Nunagaha-mimi no Mikoto and his elder
brother Kami-Ya-wi-mimi no Mikoto learnt privately his
intentions and effectively prevented him. When the business
of the misasagi was ended, they caused Yumi Be no Waka-
hiko to make a bo\v, and Yamato no l~anuchi 2 Ama-tsu-ma-
ura:: to make a true-deer arro\v-point, and the Ya -I Be to
prepare arro\vs. When the bow and arrO\\FS ,vere ready,
Kami-N unagaha-mimi no Mikoto ,vished there\vith to shoot IV.3.
to death Tagishi-mimi no Mikoto, who happened jU5t then to
be in a great muro at Kataoka, lying alone on a great couch.
Then I~ami-Nunagaha-mimino Mikoto spake to I~ami-Ya·wi

Inay suppose that he ,vas at that tillle t\venty years of age at least. \Ve arc
no,v in B.C. 585, so that he 111Ust haye been over 100.
   I i.e. of 111ourning.

   2 YUlni-be is the Be of bO\V-nlakers; Kanuchi, Slllith.

   3 Alna-tsu-lna-ura.    This nanlC is obviously identical ,vith that of the
slnith-god, Ama-tsu-lllara, nlentioned in the "Kojiki" (see Ch. I{., p. 5;), upon
which Chanlberlain remarks, " Obvius hujus nOlllinis sensus foret ' Ca~lestis
Penis.' " Ma-ura Ineans literally true-heart, or inwards, and hence caIne to
be used as a decent tcnn for penis, corresponding sOlne\vhat to our \yord
" nakedness." In modern tilnes it is a "cry vulgar \vord. This is Hirata's
vie\v. Another derivation connects it with l\Iara, the Indian (;od of lust,
sin, and death.
    If Atua-tsu-l11a-tlra or mara stood alone, we ll"light be disposed \\'ith
1\1otowori to pass it by as a proper nalne of doubtful derivation. But Hirata
(" Koshiden " y. 48) quotes [rOlTI old books three other names of deities ,,,hieh
contain this elenlent, viz. Oho (great) nlara no Mikoto, Ama-tsu-aka (red)
mara no Mikoto and Ama-teru (shining) Inara take-,vo (brave Inale) no
1\likoto. He thinks it sufficient to say that as these are the names of Gods,
a phallic interpretation is in~dlnissible, but in this European scholars ,vill
hardly agree \\'ith him. There is a l\Iara no Sukune in the Japanese
peerage of the ninth century, known as the Seishiroku. See Index-
Phallic \vorshi p.
   .. Va, arro\v.
         J26                           NlliONGI.

          no Mikoto, saying :-" The right time has now arrived. In
          words, secrecy is to be prized: in deeds, caution is advisable.
          Therefore, ,ve have never had any partner in our conspiracy, and
          the enterprise ofto-da:y is to be carried out by thee and me alone.
          I lvill first open the door of the muro. Do thou then shoot
          him." The)' accordingly went forward and entered in together.
             Kami-Nunagaha-mimi no Mikoto pushed open the door,
          while Kami-Ya-,vi-mimi no Mikoto's arms and legs trembled
          so that he ,vas unable to let fly the arro\v. Then Kami-
          N unagaha-miuli no Mikoto snatched the bow and arrO\\TS which
          his elder brother held and shot Tagishi-mimi no Mikoto.
          The first shot struck him on the breast, the second on the
          back, and so at length he killed him. Hereupon Kami-Ya-\\,i-
          mimi no Mikoto was troubled and subnlitted himself, ~yielding
          the sovereignty to Kami-Nunagaha-mimi no Mikoto, saying : -
          "I anl th~y elder brother. 1 But I am timid and weak, and
          unfit for effective action. On the present occasion thou hast
          specially displa)Ted divine valour, and hast thyself put to death
          our chief enem~y. Is it not expedient that thou shouldst
          illuminate the Celestial station ~ and take over the functions of
   IV.4- our Ilnperial ancestors? I will be thy assistant and ,\·ill
           attend to the \vorship of the Gods of Heaven and Earth." He
          ,vas the first ancestor of the Oho no Omi.
B.C. 581.     1st year, Spring, 1St month, 8th da:r. Kami-~unagaha-mimi
           no Mikoto assumed the rank of Emperor. He made his
           capital at Katsuraki. It was called the palace:J of Takaoka.
           He honoured the Empress by granting her the title of K\vo-
           dai-go or Grand Empress. 4 This was the year Kano)Te Tatsu
           of the cycle.
B.C. 580.     2nd year, Spring, 1st month. Isuzu-yori-bime was appointed
           Empress.
                   One writing says :-" Kaha-mata-bime, daughter of the
                Agata-nushi of Shiki."

          1 In this and other passages of the "Nihongi," there is a sort of recog-
        nition of a right of primogeniture, but cases are nUlnerous \vhere the eldest
        son is ignored or set aside ,vithout very strong reason in favour of a
        brother, widow, or younger son of the deceased sovereign.
          ~ i.e. the rank of Enlperor.
          3 Capital and palace are interchangeable terms in this narrative.

          4 Equivalent to EJnpress Do,vager.     This is a Chinese title.
                                  ANNEI.                                 J26

       One "Yriting says :-" Itori-hime, daughter of Ohohimoro,
     Agata-nushi of Kasuga."
She was the Emperor's aunt. The Empress bore a son, the
Emperor Shiki-tsu-hiko-tama-demi.
  4th year, Summer, 4th month. Kami-Ya-\vi-mimi no Mikoto B.C. 578.
died, and was buried on the Northern side of Mount Unebi.
  25th year, Spring, 1st month, 7th day. The Imperial Prince B.C. 557.
Shiki-tsu.. hiko-tama-den1i no 1Jikoto was made heir to the IV.
Imperial throne.
  33rd year, Summer, 5th month. The Emperor took ill, and B.C. 549·
on the loth day of the same month, he died, at the age of
eighty-four.


            THE EMPEROR SHIKI-TSU-HIKO-TAMA-DEMI.


                         (ANNE!l TENNG.)

  The Emperor Shiki-tsu-hiko-tama-demi \vas the eldest child
of the Emperor Kami.. Nunagaha-mimi. His mother's name
was Isuzu-.yori-bime no l\1ikoto, the younger daughter of
Koto-shiro-nushi no Kami.. This Emperor had been made
Prince Imperial in the 25th :year of the Emperor Kami-
Nunagaha-mimi. He ,vas then t\venty-one Z years of age. In
the 5th month, Summer, of the 33rd year of his reign, the
Emperor Kami-Nunagaha-mimi died. In the 7th month of
that year, on the 3 rd day of the month, the Prince Imperial
assumed the Imperial Dignity.
  1st year,3 \Vinter, loth month, 11th day'. The Emperor B.C. 548.
I<ami-Nunagaha-mimi was buried in the Misasagi on Tsukida
Hill in Yamato.
  The Emperor honoured the Empress with the title of !{ \Vo-
dai-go.

  1  Annei means peace.
  2  The editor of the Shukai edition alters this to eleven, in order to agree
,vith other passages. But ,,,hen the ,\'ho]e chronology is utterly fanciful,
there is no use attempting to lllake it consistent.
   S For purposes of chronology, these reigns begin with the next year

folIo,ving the previous Emperor's death. The first year of Annei~s reign is
therefore B.C. 548, although his predecessor died B.C. 549.
                                           NIHONGI.

             This ,vas the year Midzunoto Ushi of the cycle.
B.C.   547.  2nd year. The capital was removed to Katashiho. It was
           called the Palace of Ukiana.
B.C. 546.    3rd j,rear, Spring, 1st month, 5th day'. Nuna-soko-naka-tsu
   IV. 6. hime no Mikoto was appointed Empress.
                  Others call her N una-so hime.
                   One writing says :-" Kaha-tsu hime, daughter of Haye,
                Agata-nushi of Shiki."
                  One writing says :--" Daughter of Ohoma no Sukune." 1
              Before this, his consort had given birth to two Imperial
           princes. The first wa~ called Ikishi·mimi no Mikoto, the
           second, the Emperor Oho-Yamato-hiko-suki-tomo.
                  One version says :-" She bore three princes, the first of
                whom was called Toko-tsu-hiko-iro-ne; the second, the
                Emperor Oho- Yamato-hiko-suki-tomo ; and the third,
                Shiki-tsu-hiko no Mikoto."
B.C•• 538.
             11th year, 1st month, 1st day. Oho-Yamato-hiko-suki-tomo
           no Mikoto was made Prince Imperial. His younger brother,
           Shiki-tsu-hiko no Mikoto was the first ancestor of the Wi-tsu-
           kahi no M uraji.
B.C. 51 I.   38th year, Winter, 11th month, 6th day. The Emperor died
           at the age of 57. 2



                       THE EMPEROR OHO-YAMATO-HIKO-SUKI-TOMO.


                                     (ITOKU 3 TENNG.)

   IV• 7.       The Emperor Oho-Yamato-hiko-suki-tomo was the second
              child of the Emperor Shiki-tsu-hiko-tama-demi. His mother's
              -name was Nuna-soko-naka-tsu..hime, grandchild of Koto-shiro-
              nushi no Kami, and daughter of the Prince 4 of !{amo. He was
               made Prince Imperial in the 11th year, Spring, the 1St month

                1 A title, derived by Yalnada frotu Sukuna, smal~, and e or ye, elder
              brother.
                2 The" Kojiki " makes him 49·

                I Admirable virtue.

                                                        :r
                4 Prince is here :E, a lower rank than §!  or Imperial Prince.
                                   ITOK.u.                               143
of the Emperor Shiki-tsu-hiko-tama-delni's reign. He \vas then
16 years of age. In the 38th year of that reign, \\Tinter, the
12th month, the Emperor Shiki-tsu-hiko-tama-demi died. l
   1st year, Spring, 2nd month, 4th day. The Prince Imperial B.C. 510.
assumed the Imperial Dignity.
   Autun1n, 8th month, 1st day. The Emperor Shiki-tsu-hiko-
tama-demi \vas buried in the Misasagi above Mihodo no wi,
south of Mount U nebi.
   9th month, 14th da~y. The Empress was honoured with the
title of Grand Empress. This was the ~year Kanoto U of the
cycle.
   2nd year, Spring, 1st month, 5th day. The capital was B.C. 509·
removed to Karu.~ It was called the Palace of Magariwo.
   2nd month, I lth day. Ama-toyo-tsu-hime no Mikoto \vas
made Empress.
        One version has :-" Idzumi hime, daughter of Oto-\vite,
      son of Haye, Agata-nushi of Shiki."
        One version has :-" Ihi-hime, daughter of Futo-ma- IV. S.
      waka-hiko, Agata-nushi of Shiki."
   This Empress ,,,as the mother of the Emperor Mi-matsu-
hiko-Kayeshine.
        One version has :-" The Emperor's younger brother
      by the mother's side,:i Takeshi-hiko-kushi-tomo se no
      Mikoto." 4
   22nd year, Spring, 2nd month, 12th day. Mi-matsu-hiko- B.C. 489.
 Kaycshine no l\1ikoto was made Prince Imperial. He was
then 18 years of age.
   34th year, Autumn, 9th month, 8th day. The Emperor B.C. 477
died.

  1 These      repetItIons seeln intended to conceal the ,,,ant of any real
inforlnation about this period.
  2 In Yanlato.

  3 'The Japanese ,vord for brother by the mother's side is hara-kara," of

the saBle belly," as to which a paper by the present \vriter on tl~e " FaIl1ily
in Ancient Japan," contributed to the Japan Society's Journal, lllay be con-
sulted.
   .. I t is not clear \"hat is ll1cant by this.
        144                                  NIHONGI.




                       THE EMPEROR MI-MATSU-HIKO-KAYESHINE.


                                    (KOS/i0 1 TENNO.)

              The Emperor Mi.,matsu-hiko-Kayeshine was the eldest son
           of the Emperor Oho-Yamato-hiko-suki-tomo. The name of
           the Empress, his mother, was Ama-to~yo-tsu-hime no Mikoto.
           She was the daughter of Ikishi-mimi no Mikoto.
              The Emperor had been made Prince Imperial in Spring, the
           second month of the 22nd year of the reign of the Emperor Oho-
           Yamato-hiko-suki-tomo.       The Emperor Oho-Yamato-hiko-
           suki-tomo died in autumn, the ninth month of the 34th year of
           his reign. On the 13th day of the loth month of the following
           year, the Emperor Oho.. Yamato-hiko-suki-tomo was buried in
           the Misasagi over the Masago Valley to the south of Mount
           Unebi.
   IV. 9.     1st year, Spring, 1st month, 9th day. The Prince Inlperial
B.C. 475. assunled the Imperial Dignity.
              Summer, 4th month, 5th day. The Empress was honoured
           with the title of Grand Empress. 2
              7th month. The capital was removed to Wakigami. 3 It
           was called the Palace of Ikegokoro. This year was the year
           Hinoye T ora of the cycle.
B.C. 447.     29th year, Spring, 1st month, 3rd day. Yoso-tarashi-hime
           was appointed Empress.
                    One version says :-" Nunaki-tsu hime, daughter of
                  Haye, Agata-nushi of Shiki."
                    One version has :-" Oho-wi-hime, daughter of Toyo-
                  aki-sata-wo of the Land of Yamato."
              The Empress gave birth to Ama·tarashi..hiko-kuni-oshi-bito
            no Mikoto, and to the Enlperor Yamato-tarashi-hiko-kuni-oshi-
            bito.
 B.C. 408.     68th year, Spring, 1st month, 14th day. Yamato-tarashi-
            hiko-kuni-oshi-bito no Mikoto was made Prince Imperial. He


              1   Filial piety manifested.                    2   K \vo ... dai- o.
                                             3   In Yamato.
                                    KOAN.                             '45
was twenty years of age. Ama-tarashi-hiko-kuni-oshi-bito no
Mikoto was the first ancestor of the Wani no Omi.
  83rd year, Autumn, 8th month, 5th day. The Emperor B.C. 393.
died.




       THE EMPEROR YAMATO-TARASHI-HIKO-KUNI-OSHI-BITO.

                            (KOAN 1 TEN1VO.)

   The Emperor Yamato-tarashi-hiko-kuni-oshi-bito \vas the IV. 10.
second child of the Emperor Mi-matsu-hiko-kayeshine. His
mother's name was Yoso-tarashi-hime. She was the younger
sister of Okitsu Yoso, the ancestor of the Ohari no 2 Muraji.
   The Emperor was made Prince Imperial in Spring, the 1st
month of the 68th year of the reign of the Emperor Mi-matsu-
hiko-kayeshine. The Emperor Mi-matsu-hiko-kayeshine died
in Autumn, the 8th month of the 83rd year of his reign.
   1st year, Spring, 1st month, 7th day. The Prince Imperial B.C. 392.
assumed the Imperial Dignity.
   Autumn, 8th month, 1St day. The Empress 'vas honoured
with the title of Grand Empress. This year was the yea:"
Tsuchi no to U shi of the cycle.
   2nd year, Winter, loth month. The capital was removed to B.C. 391.
Muro. It was called the Palace of Akitsushima.
   26th year, Spring, 2nd month, 14th day. The Emperor B.C. 367.
appointed his niece/ Oshi-bime, Empress.
        One version has :-" N aga-hime, daughter of Haye,
      Agata-nushi of Shiki."
        One version has ':-" Isaka-hime, daughter of Isaka-hiko,
      Agata-nushi of Tohochi."
   The E·mpress was the mother of the Emperor Oho-Yamato-
neko-hiko-futo-ni.
   38th year, Autumn, 8th month, I4th day. The Emperor Mi.. B.C. 355-
matsu-hiko-kayeshine was buried in the Misasagi on Mount
 Hakata in Wakigami.
   76th year, Spring, 1st month, 5th da)r. Oho-Yamato-neko- IV. II.
                                                                            B.C. 317.

  1   Filial piety-peace.      2   Or O\vari.   3   A brother's daughter.
        J26                          NIHONGI.

          hiko-futo-ni no !vIikoto was made Prince Imperial. He was
          then twenty-six years of age.
       1
JLC. 29 •    I02nd year, Spring, 1st month, 9th day.   The Emperor
          died.




               THE EMPEROR OHO-YAMATO-NEK01.. HIKO-FUTO-NI.

                              (KOREI2 TENNO.)

              The Emperor Oho-Yamato-neko-hiko-futo-ni was the eldest
           child of the Emperor Yamato-tarashi-hiko-kuni-oshi-bito. His
           mother's name was Oshi-bime. He had been appointed Prince
           Imperial in Spring, the 1st month of the 76th year of the reign
           of the Emperor Yamato-tarashi-hiko-kuni-oshi-bito. In Spring,
           the 1st month of the 102nd year of his reign, the Emperor
           Yamato-tarashi-hiko-kuni-oshi-bito died. In Autumn, the 9th
           month, 13th day, the Emperor Yamato-tarashi-hiko-kuni-oshi-
           bito was buried in the Misasagi on Tamade Hill.
              Winter, 12th month, 4th day. The Prince Imperial removed
           the capital to Kuroda. 3 It \vas called the Palace of Ihoda.
B.C. 290.     1st year, Spring, 1St month, 12th day. The Prince Imperial
           assumed the Imperial Dignity. He honoured the Empress
           with the title of Grand Empress. This year was the year
            Kanoto Hitsuji of the cycle.
 JLC. 29 1
              2nd year, Spring, 2nd month, 11th day. Hoso-bime no Mi-
JLC. 29 1 koto was appointed Empress.

                   One version has :-" Kasuga no Chichi-haya-yamaka-
                hime."
                   One version has :-" Mashita-bime, daughter of Toso,
                Agata-nushi of Tohochi."
              The Empress was the mother of the Emperor Oho-Yam.ato-
            neko-hiko-kuni-kuru.. A concubine named Yamato no kuni-ka-
            hime [also called Haye-irone] ,vas the mother of Yamato-to-to-

           1 Several of the Emperors' names have the element Yamato-neko (neko
        is a honorific), and one Emperor styles himself Yamato-neko in an edict,
        although this was not his name. It may be suspected that Yamato-neko was
        at one time a general title for the sovereigns of Japan.
           2 Filial piety-spirit.                           3 In Yamato.
                              !{OGEN.                               147

hi-momo~so bime no Mikoto and of Hiko..i-saseri-hiko no Mikoto
 [also called Kibi-tsu-hiko no Mikoto] , and Y amato-toto-waka-
~ya- bime no M ikoto.
   Another concubine Haye-iroto was the mother of Hiko-
sajima no Mikoto and of Waka-take-hiko no Mikoto. The
younger of these, namely, Waka-take-hiko no Mikoto, was the
first ancestor of the Kibi no Omi. 1
   3 6th year, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. Hiko-kuni-kuru no B.C. 255·
Mikoto was made Prince Imperial.
    76th year, Spring, 2nd n10nth, 8th day~ The Emperor died. B.C. 215·




      THE EMPEROR OHO-YAMATO-NEKO-HIKO-KUNI-KURU.                           IV. 13.

                      (KOGEN 2 TENNO.)

  The EmperorOho- Yamato-neko-hiko-kuni-kuru was the eldest
child of the Emperor Oho-Yamato-neko-hiko-futo-ni. His
mother's name was Hoso-bime, daughter of Oho-me,3 Agata-
nushi of Shiki. He had been created Prince Imperial in Spring,
the 1st month of the 36th ~year of the reign of the Emperor Oho-
Yamato-neko..hiko-futo-ni. He was then nineteen years of age.
The Elnperor Oho-Yamato-neko-hiko-futo-ni died in Spring,
the 2nd month of the 76th year of his reign.
  1st year, Spring, Ist month, '14th day. The Prince Imperial H.C. 214,
assumed the Imperial Dignity. He honoured the Empress with
the title of Grand Empress. This year was the year Hinoto I
of the cycle.
  4th year, Spring, 3rd month, 11th day. The capital \vas B.C. 211.
removed to Karu. It was called the Palace of Sakahibara.
  6th year, Autumn, 9th month, 6th day. The Emperor Oho- B.C. 2°9
Yamato-neko-hiko-futo-ni was buried in the Misasagi on Muma-
zaka 4 at Kataoka.


  1 The" Kojiki " genealogies differ a good deal.  One must be wrong; and
both, doubtless, leave much to be desired in accuracy.
  ~ Filial-duty-origin.
  3 Great-eyes.

  4 The horse-acclivity.
            J26                                NIliO~GI.

B.C. 208.     7th year, Spring, 2nd month, 2nd day. Uchi-shiko-me no
            Mikoto was appointed Empress. She had three children, two
           boys and one girl. The name of the eldest was Oho-hiko no
           Mikoto; of the second, the Emperor Waka-Yamato-neko-hiko
           Oho-hihi; and of the third, Yamato-toto-hime no Mikoto.
                  One version has :-" The Emperor's brother by the
                mother's side was Sukuna-biko-wo-kokoro 1 no Mikoto."
  IV". 14·   A concubine named Ika-shiko-me no Mikoto was the mother
           of Hiko-futo-woshi-makoto no Mikoto. The next concubine,
           named Hani.. yasu-hime, daughter of Awotama of Kahachi, was
           the mother of Take-hani-yasu no Mikoto.
             The elder brother Oho-hiko no Mikoto was the first ancestor
           of the Abe no Omi, the Kashihade 2 no Omi, the Ahe no Omi,
           the Sasaki-yama no Kimi, the Tsukushi no Miyakko, the Koshi
           no Miyakko and the Iga no Omi, in all seven families.
  IV. 15.     Hiko-futo-woshi-makoto no Mikoto was the grandfather of
           Takechi no Sukune.
R.C. 193.    22nd year, Spring, 1St month, 14th day. Waka-Yamato-
           neko-hiko-oho-hihi no Mikoto was made Prince Ilnperial. He
           was sixteen years of age.
B.C. 158•    57th year, Autumn, 9th month, 2nd da)t. The Emperor
           died.



                  THE EMPEROR WAKA-YAMATO-NEKO-HIKO-.OHO-HIHI.


                                 (KAIK W A 3 TENNO.)

              The Emperor Waka-Yamato-neko-hiko-oho-hihi was the
            second child of the Emperor Oho-Yamato-neko-hiko-kuni-kuru.
            His mother's name was Uchi-shikome, the ancestor of the
            Hodzumi no Omi, and younger sister of U chi-shiko-wo no
            Mikoto.
              The Emperor had been created Prince Imperial in Spring,
            the 1st month of the 22nd year of the reign of the Emperor
            Oho-Yamato-neko-hiko-kuni-kuru. He was then sixteen years.
            of age.
             1 Small-prince-manly-heart.                       ~ This word means ste\vard.
                                           I   Civilization.
                               KAII{\VA.                               149
   The Emperor Oho-Yamato-neko-hiko-kuni-kuru died in
Autumn, the 9th month of the 57th year of his reign.
   In Winter, the 11th month, 12th day, the Prince Imperial
assumed the Imperial Dignity.
   1st year, Spring, Ist month, 4th day. The Empress was B.C. 157.
honoured with the title of Grand Empress.
   Winter, loth month, 13th day. The capital was removed to
Kasuga. It \\'as called the Palace of Isa-kaha. This year I\i. 16.
was the year Kinoye Saru of the cycle.
   5th year, Spring, 2nd month, 6th day. The Emperor Oho.. R.C. 153·
Yamato-neko-hiko-kuni-kuru was buried in the Misasagi on the
island of Tsurugi-ike. 1
   6th year, Spring, 1st month, 14th day. Ika-shiko-me no R.C. 152.
Mikoto was appointed Empress. [She was his fatlter's concu-
oine.] The Empress was the mother of the Emperor Mimaki-
iri-h i ko- i -n i ye.
   The Emperor had previously taken to himself as concubine
Taniha no Takano-hime. She was the mother of Hiko-yu-
musumi no Mikoto. [Also called Hiko~ko11l0SU no ivfikoto.] There
was a subordinate concubine named Oke-tsu-hime, younger
sister of Oke-tsll no Mikoto, the ancestor of the \Vani no Omi.
She was the mother of Prince 2 Hiko·imasu.
   28th year, Spring, 1st month, 5th day. Mimaki-iri-hiko no IV. 17.
Mikoto was created Prince Imperial. He was nineteen years B.C. 13°
of age.
   60th year, Summer, 4th month, 9th day. The Emperor B.C. 98.
died.
   Winter, loth month, 3rd day. He was buried In the Saka-
moto Misasagi at Isa-kaha in Kasuga.
          One version has :-" The Misasagi of Saka no kami." ~
   His age was then 115.

  1  Ike means a pond or artificial lake.
  2  Where Prince stands alone without the word Imperial before or after it,
it represents the Chinese character :7:, which in the" Nihongi ,; is applied
sometimes to the kings or princes of Corea, but nlore usually to Japanese
princes who did not belong to the family of the reigning sovereign.
   3 It is difficult to say whether Saka-moto and Saka no kami are proper
names or merely descriptions. They mean· respectively the" bottom of the
acclivity" and the" top of the acclivity."
                                     BOOK V.

                      THE EMPEROR MIMAKI-IRI-BIKO-I-NIYE.

                                (SU/IN 1 TENNO.)

       THE         Emperor Mimaki-iri-biko-i-niye was the second child of
            tIle Emperor Waka-yamato-neko-hiko-oho-hi-hi. His mother's
            name was Ika-shiko-me, daughter of Oho-he-so-ki no Mikoto,
            the ancestor of the Mononobe House. 2
               The Emperor was created Prince Imperial at the age of
            nineteen. He was of a quick intelligence, and in his boyhood
            was fond of manly devices. When he grew up to manhood, he
            was of wide culture and circumspect in his behaviour. He
            honoured profoundly the Gods of Heaven and Earth. His
            mind was constantly directed to the management of the
            Celestial Institution. a
               The Emperor Waka-yamato-neko-hiko-oho-hihi died In
            Summer, the 4th month of the 60th year of his reign.
B.C. 9i·       1st year, Spring, 1st month, 13th day. The Prince Imperial
            assumed the Imperial Dignity. He honoured the Empress
            with the title of Grand Empress.
               2nd month, 16th.. day. Mimaki-hime was appointed Em-
            press. Before this she had given birth to the Emperor Iku-
            me..iri-hiko-i-sachi, Kuni-kata-hime no Mikoto, Chichi-tsuku
            Yamato-himeno Mikoto, Yamato-hiko no Mikoto, and lka-tsuru-
    \;". 2. hiko no Mikoto.     By a concubine, Tohotsu Ayume ma-kuwashi-
             hime, daughter of Araka, the Tohe of the Land of Kil, he
             had Toyo-suki-iri-hiko no Mikoto, and a subordinate con-
             cubine named Ohari no Oho-aula.
                    One version has :-" Ya-saka..furu-ama-irohe, daughter of
                 Oho-umi no-Sukune."

           1   Slijin means "honouring the Gods."        , In Japanese Vji.
                                    3 The sovereignty.
                               SUJIN.                             J26

bore to him Ya-saka-iri-hiko no Mikoto, Nunaki-iri-bime no
Mikoto, and Toho-chi-ni-iri-bime no Mikoto.
   This year \vas the year Kinoye Saru of the cycle.
   3rd year, Autumn, 9th month. The capital was removed to R.C. 95·
Shiki. It was called the Palace of Midzu-gaki.
   4th year, Winter, 10th month, 13th day. The Emperor R.C. 94-
issued a decree, saying :--" When our Imperial ancestors
gloriously assumed the Supreme Rank, was it for the benefit of
themselves alone?       It was doubtless in order that they
might thereb~y shepherd men and spirits/ and regulate the
Empire. Therefore it was that from generation to generation
they were able to extend their unfathomable merit, and in their
day to spread abroad their perfect virtue.
   We, having now received at their hands the mighty inheri-
tance, lovingly nourish our good subjects. In so doing, let us
follo\v obediently in the footsteps of our Imperial ancestors,
and long preserve the unbounded felicity. And ye too, Our
Ministers and functionaries, should you not co-operate with all v. 3.
loyalty in giving peace to the Empire? " 2
   5th year. There was much pestilence throughout the B.C. 93-
country, and more than one half the people died.
   6th year. The people took to vagabondage, and there ,vas B.C. 92.
rebellion, the violence of which was such that by \vorth alone
it could not be assuaged. 3
   Therefore, rising early in the morning and being full of a\\re
until the evening, the Emperor requested punishment <I of the
Gods of Heaven and Earth.
   Before this the t""o Gods Ama-terasu no Oho-kami and
Yamato no Oho-kuni-dama 5 were \vorshipped together within
the Emperor's Great Hall. He dreaded, however, the power
of these Gods, and did not feel secure in their dwelling
together. Therefore he entrusted Ama-terasu no Oho-kami to
Toyo-suki-iri-bime no ~fikoto to be worshipped at the village

  1  The Kana bas simply bito, men.
  2  This decree is a mere cento of Chinese phrases.
  3 i.e., by tbe virtues of the Sovereign commanding the respect and

obedience of the people .
  .. In accordance with the Chinese notion that national calamities are
owing to the faults of the Emperor.
   & The numen of the great land of Yanlato.
        J26                             NIHONGI.

            of Kasanuhi in Yamato, where he established the sacred en-
  v~ 4. closure     of Shiki. Moreover, he entrusted Yamato-oho-kuni-
           dama no Kami to Nunaki-iri-bime no Mikoto to be worshipped.
            But Nunaki-iri-bime no Mikoto was bald and lean, and there-
           fore unfit to perform the rites of worship.
.ll.C.9 1•    7th year, Spring, 2nd month, 15th day. The Emperor
           decreed as follows :-" Of old our Imperial ancestors greatly
           extended the vast foundation, and under the later Emperors
           the institution became more and more exalted. The royal in-
           fluence spread and flourished. But now that it has devolved upon
           Us, numerous calamities have unexpectedly befallen it. It is to
           be feared that from the absence of good Government in the Court,
           \Ve have incurred the blame of the Gods of Heaven and Earth.
           Would it not be well to commit the matter to the Sacred
           Tortoise 1 and thereby ascertain the cause of the calamity? "
              Accordingly, the Emperor hereupon proceeded to the plain
           of Kami-asachi, where he assembled the 80 myriads of Deities,
           and inquired of them by means of divination. At this time the
           Gods inspired Yamato-to-to-hi-momoso-hime no Mikoto to say
           as follows :-" Why is the Emperor grieved at the disordered
           state of the country? If he duly did us reverent worship it
           would assuredly become pacified of itself." The Emperor in-
    v. 5- quired, saying :-" What God is it that thus instructs me?"
           The answer was :-" I am the God who dwells within the
           borders of the land of Yamato, and my name is Oho-mono-
           nushi no Kami."
              Now, having obtained this divine message, the Emperor
           worshipped as he was told, but without effect. Then, having
            bathed and practised abstinence, and purified the interior of
            the Hall, he prayed, saying :-" Is Our observance of due cere-
           monies towards the Gods not yet complete? This non-
           acceptance is cruel. We pray that We may be further instructed
           in a dream, and the divine favour thereb)T consummated.~~
              That night he had a dream. A man of noble appearance
           stood opposite to him in the door of the hall, and, announcing
           himself as Oho-mono-nushi no Kami, said :-" Let the

         1 The ancient Japanese divination was by roasting deer's shoulder-blades

       and observing the cracks thus caused, not by the shell of a tortoise, which is
       the Chinese practice.
                                 SUJIN.                                153
Emperor grieve no more for the disorder of the country. This
is my will. If thou wilt cause me to be worshipped by my
child, Oho-tata-neko, then will there be peace at once. More-
over the lands beyond the sea will of their own accord render
submission.' ,
   Autumn, 8th month, 7th day. Yamato-to-to-kami-asachi-
hara-ma-guhashi-hime, Oho-mina-kuchi-no Sukune, the an-
cestor of the Hodzumi no Omi, and the Kimi of W o-umi in
Ise had all three the same dream, which they reported to the
Emperor, saying :-" Last night we had a dream in \vhich there
appeared a man of noble aspect, who admonished us, saying : -
'Let Oho-tata-neko no Mikoto be appointed master of the
worship of Oho-mono-nushi-no-oho-kami, and let Ichi-shi no V, 6.
Naga-ochi be appointed master of the worship of Yamato no
Oho-kuni-dama no KamL Then assuredly the Empire will
 have profound peace.' "
   The Emperor, when he learned the words of the dream, ,vas
more and more delighted in his heart. By a proclamation to
the Empire he sought for Oho-tata-neko, who was accordingly
found in the village of Suye, in the district of Chinu,) and sent
to the Emperor, who forthwith proceeded in person to the plain
of Kami-asachi, and assembled all the Princes and Ministers, and
 the eighty Be. He then inquired of Oho-tata-neko, saying :--
 "Whose child art thou?" He answered and said :-" My
 father's name is Oho-mono-nushi no Oho-kami. My mother's
 name is Ikudama-yori-bime, daughter of Suye-tsu mimi."
         Also called Kushi-hi-kata-ame-hi-kata, daughter of
      Take-chinu-tsumi.
   The Emperor said :-" Now we shall be prosperous." So
 he ascertained by divination that it would be lucky to send Ika-
 shiko-wo to distribute offerings to the Gods. He also divined
 that it would be unlucky to take advantage of this opportunity
 to \vorship other Gods. 2
    lIth month, 8th day.3 The Emperor took the articles j for
  1 In IdzUlni.                    2 Than the t,vo above mentioned.

  3 The original has cyclical characters which \vould make it the 56th day of
the month. I have adopted an emendation which does not make obvious
nonsense.    But where the whole series of dates is fictitious, it is hardly
worth while noticing minor inaccuracies of this kind.
  4 Of pottery.                               I
        J26                           NIHONGI.

         the worship of the Gods which he ordered Ika-shiko-wo to have
         made by the hands of the eighty Mononobe, and appointed
         Oho-tata-neko Master of the worship of Oho-mono-nushi no
         Oho-kami.      Moreover he made Nagaochi Master of the
         worship of Yamato no Oho-kuni-dama no Kami.
            After that, he divined that it would be lucky to worship the
         other Gods. So he took the opportunity of separately wor-
         shipping the assemblage of eighty myriads of Deities. He also
         settled which were to be Heavenly shrines and which Earthly
         shrines, and allotted land and houses for the service of the
         Gods. Thereupon the pestilence first ceased; the country
         at length had peace, the five kinds of grain were produced, and
         the peasantry enjoyed abundance.
B.C. 90.    8th year, Summer, 4th month, 6th day. A man of the
         village of Takahashi, named Ikuhi, was appointed Brewer to
         the Great Deity.
            Winter, 12th month, 20th day. The Emperor caused Oho-
         tata-neko to worship the Great Deity. On this day, Ikuhi, in
         person, presented to the Emperor sacred sake, with a song, as
         follows : -
                              This sacred sake
                              Is not my sacred sake:
                              'Tis sacred sake brewed
                              By Oho-mono-nushi,
                              Of Yamato,
                              Ho\v long ago!
                              Ho\" long ago! 1

           Having thus sung, they feasted in the Shrine of the God.
        As soon as the feast was over, the various high officials sang as
        follows : -
 V.8.                    The Hall of Miwa
                           (Of s\veet sake fame),
                         Even its morning door
                          We \vould go forth from-
                         The door of the Hall of l'vliwa.

          Hereupon the Emperor sang as follows : -

          1 "How long ago" is in Japanese Ikuhisa, an obvious allusion to the
        Brewer's name, Ikuhi, in short a pun.
                                     SUlIN.                                     155
                         The Hall of Miwa
                           (Of s\veet sake fame),
                         Even its nlorning-door
                           I would push open-
                         The door of the Hall of l\1hva. l

   So the door of the Shrine of the God was thrown open, and
the Emperor proceeded on his way.
   He who was called Oho-tata-neko was the first ancestor of the
Kimi of Miwa.
   9th year, Spring, 3rd month. 15th day. The Emperor had B.C. 89.
a dream in which a divine person appeared to him and in-
structed him, saying :-" Take eight red shields and eight red
spears and do worship to the God of Sumi-zaka. Take more-
over eight black shields and eight black spears and do \vor-
ship to the God of Oho-zaka."
   Summer, 4th month, 16th day. In accordance with the in-
struction he had received in the dream, he worshipped the
Gods of Sumi-zaka and Oho-zaka. 2
   loth year, Autumn, 7th month, 24 th day. He proclaimed B.C. 8~.
to the company of Ministers, saying :-" For the guidance of
the people, the chief thing is education. Now that I have
performed due rites to the Gods of Heaven and Earth, all
calamity has become spent. The distant savages, however, do
not receive our calendar because they are yet unaccustomed to
the civilizing influences of our rule. \Ve will, therefore, select v. 9.
some of our company of Ministers and despatch them to the
four quarters, so that they may cause our Will to be known."
   9th month, 9th day. The Emperor sent Oho-hiko no
Mikoto to the northern region, he sent Takenu-kaha vvake to
the Eastern Sea,:{ he sent Kibi 4 -tsu-hiko to the Western road,

     1 The sentiment of these poems seems to be the same as that of our o\vn

"We won't go home tilllnorning."
     Metre irregular.
    2 However unhistorical all this nlay be, one thing clearly appears from it,
viz., that in the early days of Japan the king and high priest were identical.
Both the civil and religious functions, however, might be equally delegated.
    I In the original To-kai, \\"hence Tokaido, East-sea-road, the great high-

way from Kioto to the East and also the provinces lying to each side of
it.
    .. Kibi is the ancient nanlC for Dizen, Bingo, and Bittchiu, \\7hich lie \vest of
Yanlato.
         J26                            NIHONGI.

         he sent Tamba no chi-nushi no Mikoto to Tamba. On this
         occasion he addressed them, saying :-" If there be any who
         do not receive our instructions, prepare war and smite them."
         Having said so, he granted them all alike seals and ribbons;
         and appointed them generals.
            27th day. Oho-hiko no Mikoto arrived at the top of the
         Wani acclivity. Now there was there a maiden who sang as
         follows : -
                One version has :-" Dho-hiko-no Mikoto arrived at the
              Hira-zaka acclivity, in Yamashiro. Now there was by the
              road-side a young woman who sang as follows: "-
                            Ah ! Prince Miluaki.iri !
                            Unaware that some are stealthily
                            Preparing to cut
                            The thread of thine own life,
                            Thou amusest thyself like a lady!
v. 10.          Another version is : -
                            Unaware that some are preparing
                            To slay thee,
                            On the watch
                            At the great gate,
                            Thou aluusest thyselflike a lady! ::

           Wondering at this, Oho-hiko inquired of the maiden, saying:
         - " What are these words that thou sayest?" She answered
         and said :-" I was saying nothing: I was only singing." So she
         sang over again the above song, and suddenly disappeared.
         Oho-hiko accordingly returned and reported these circumstances
         to the Emperor. Upon this Yamato-toto-hi momo so bime no
         Mikoto, the Emperor's aunt by the father's side, a shrewd and
         intelligent person, who could foresee the future, understood
         what was portended by this song, and told the Emperor that
         it was a sign that Take-hani-yasu-hiko a was about to plot
         treason against him. "I have heard," she said, "that Ata-
         bime, Take-hani-yasu-hiko's wife, came secretly and took earth

           1 The seals and ribbons are Chinese, and could not have been used as
         emblems of office in Japan at this time. The word for general is Shogun,
         so familiar at a later period of Japanese History.
           2 The text of this poem is very doubtful. The" Kojiki" has a third version.
         Prince Mimaki-iri is the Emperor.
           3 A half-brother of the En1peror.    He lived in Yaulashiro.
                                SUJIN.                                157
from Mount Kako 1 in Y-amato, which she wrapped in her
neckerchief and prayed, saying :-' This earth represents the V. II.
Land of Yamato,' and turned it upside down. By this I know
that there will be troubles. If thou clost not speedily take
measures, it will assuredly be too late." Hereupon he recalled
all the generals and consulted with them. No long time after,
Take-hani-yasu-hiko and his wife Ata-bime conspired to revolt,
and arrived suddenly with an army which they had raised.
They came each by different roads, the husband by way of
Yamashiro, the wife by Oho-saka. They intended to join their
forces and attack the capital. Then the Emperor sent Isaseri-
hiko no Mikoto to attack the force led by Ata-bime. He
accordingly intercepted it at Oho-saka and put it all to a great
rout. Ata-bime \vas killed, and her troops were all slain.
 Afterwards he sent Oho-hiko and Hiko-kuni . fuku, the ancestor
 of the Wani no Omi, towards Yamashiro to attack Take-hani-
 yasu. Here they' took sacred jars and planted them at the top
 of the acclivity of Takasuki in Wani.~ Then they advanced
 with their best troops and ascended Mount Nara and occupied
 it. Now when the Imperial forces were encamping, they trod
 level the herbs and trees, whence that mountain was given the
 name of Mount Nara. 3 Then abandoning Mount Nara, they v. 12.
  proceeded as far as the River Wakara. Hani-yasu-hiko was
 encamped on both sides of the river, and the two armies
 challenged each other. Therefore the men of that time changed
 the name of the river, and called it the River Idomi," which \s
 now corrupted into Idzumi.
     Hani-yasu-hiko, standing on the bank of this river, inquired
 of Hiko-kuni-fuku, saying :-" Why hast thou raised an army
  and come hither?" He answered and said :-" Thou, in oppo-
  sition to Heaven, and regardless of right, clost intend to over..
  turn the Royal chamber.' Therefore I have raised a loyal
  army to punish thy revolt. This is the Emperor's command."
  Hereupon there was a struggle who should shoot first. Hani-
  yasu-hiko shot first at Hiko-kuni-fuku, but missed him. Then


    1 The same as Mount Kagu above referred to.
    2 i.e. they sacrificed to the Gods before entering on the campaign.
    • N arasu means to make level.
    " Challenge River.                         l) We would say the thron~
       J26                           NIl-lONGI.

       Hiko-kuni-fuku aimed at Hani-yasu-hiko, hit him in the breast,
       and killed him. His troops lost courage and retreated. The~y
       were consequently pursued and driven in rout to the north ot
       the river. More than half had their heads cut off, and of dead
       bodies there "vas a plentiful overflo\v. Therefore that place
       was named Hafu-sono. 1
         i\gain the troops fled in fear and their excrements were voided
       on their breeches. So they took off their armour and ran.
       Knowing that they could not escape, they bowed their heads to
       the ground, and said, "Our Lord." Therefore the men of that
       time called the place where the armour was taken off "Ka-
       wara," 2 and the place where the breeches were defiled they
       called I{uso-bakama. 3 It is now called Kusuba, which is a
       corruption of this word.
v. 13-    Moreover the place where they bowed their heads \vas called
       A-gimi. 4
         After tkis Yamato-toto-hi-momo-so-bime no Mikoto became
       the wife of Oho-mono-nushi no Kami. This God, however,
       was never seen in the day-time, but came at night. Yamato-
       toto-hime no Mikoto said to her husband :-" As my Lord is
       never seen in the day-time, I am unable to view his august
       countenance distinctly; I beseech him therefore to delay a while,
       that in the morning I may look upon the majesty of his
       beauty." The Great God answered and said :-" What thou
       sayest is clearly right. To-morrow morning I will enter thy toilet-
       case and stay there. I pray thee be not alarmed at m~y form."
       Yamato-toto-hime no Mikoto wondered secretly in her heart at
       this. Waiting until daybreak, she looked into her toilet-case.
       There was there a beautiful little snake,S of the length and thick-
       ness of the cord of a garment. Thereupon she was frightened,
       and uttered an exclamation. The Great God was ashamed, and
       changing suddenly into human form, spake to his wife, and


        1 Afureru is " to overflow," sana means garden. Hafu is more probably for
      bafuri, sacrifice.
        2 An old \vord for" armour."            Js "Excrement-breeches."
        .. Our Lord. See above.
        & This is one of numerous evidences of serpent-,,'orship in Ancient Japan.

      The interlinear Kana for snake is worochi, "'here the last syllable is a
      honorific.
                                SUJIN.                                159
said :-" Thou didst not contain thyself, but hast caused me
shame: I will in my turn put thee to shame." So treading
the Great Void, he ascended to Mount Mimoro. Hereupon
Yamato-toto-hime no Mikoto looked up and had remorse.
She flopped down on a seat and \vith a chopstick stabbed
herself in the pudenda so that she died. She was buried at
Oho-chi. Therefore the men of that time called her tomb the
Hashi no haka.\ This tomb was made by men in the day-time, v. 14.
and by Gods at night. It was built of stones carried from
Mount Oho-saka. Now the people standing close to each other
passed the stones from hand to hand, and thus transported
them from the mountain to the tomb. The men of that time
made a song about this, saying : -

                   If one passed from hand to hand
                   The rocks
                   J1uilt up
                   On Oho-saka,2
                   Ho\\" hard 't\vould be to send theln ! 3

  Winter, loth month, 1st day. The Emperor gave com-
mand to his 1'Iinisters, saying :-" The rebels have now all
yielded themselves to execution and there is peace in the home
district. 4 But the savage tribes abroad 6 continue to be
tumultuous. Let the generals of the four roads now make
haste to set out." On the 22nd day, the four generals set out
on their journeys simultaneously.

  1 The Chopstick Tomb.
  2 The great acclivity.
  3 The tombs of men of rank at this period of Japanese History consisted
of a round mound of earth varying in size according to the station of the
person interred, and containing a vault of megalithic stones, with an
entranc~ gallery similar to those of the Imperial Misasagi, but of much
smaller size. Many of these are still to be seen in Japan, especially in
the provinces near Yamato. Of course it is utterly impossible to pass from
hand to hand stones of the size used in constructing these tombs.
  " The original is Kinai, lnore familiarly known as Gokinai, and comprising
the provinces ofYamato, Yamashiro, Settsu, Kawachi, and Idzumi.
  6 Lit. outside the sea. This is a Chinese expression \vhich must not
be taken too literally. The Ainos may be referred to. But the whole
passage seems inspired by recollections from Chinese literature, and is
probably entirely fictitious.
             J26
             160                             NIHONGI.

B.C.   87.  11th year, Summer,4th month, 28th day. The generals of the
          four roads reported to the Emperor the circumstances of their
         pacification of the savages. This year strange tribes came in
         great numbers and there was tranquillity throughout the land.
B.C. 86.    12th year, Spring, 3rd month, 11th day. The following
          decree was issued :-" Ever since we received the Celestial
          Dignity and undertook the guardianship of the ancestral
         shrines, OUf light has been subject to obscuration, and Our
         influence has been wanting in placidi(y. Consequently there
         has been disaccord in the action of the male and female
         principles of nature, heat and cold have mixed their due order,
         epidemic disease has been rife, and calamities have befallen
 v. 15. the people. But now in order to be absolved from Our
         offences and to rectify Our errors, we have reverently worshipped
         the Gods of Heaven and Earth. We have also dispensed
         Our instructions and thus pacified the savage tribes, anel
         by force of arms have chastised those who refused sub-
         mission. In this way authority has been maintained, while
         below there are no retired people. 1 Education 2 is widespread;
         the multitude take delight in their industries; a strange tribes
         come employing several interpreters; the countries beyond the
         sea offer allegiance. At this time We think it fit to make a new
         recension of the people, and to acquaint them with grades of
         seniority, and the order of forced labour."
            Autumn,9th month, 16th day. A census of the people was
         begun and taxes were imposed anew. These are called the
         men's bow-end tax and the women's finger-end tax. 4 Therefore
         the Gods of Heaven and Earth were harmonious. The wind


               1 By "retired people" are probably meant those who have concealed them-
             selves in order to escape from oppression. The phras.e occurs in the "Con-
             fucian Analects" (Legge, p. 2(0), where, however, it is used of a voluntary
             retirement from the ,vorid.
               ~ The "education" is not juvenile education, but the education of the
             people by the good example of the monarch, with, perhaps, an occasiQnal
             discour£e from the throne.
               a From" authority" to " industries" is copied from a Chinese History of
             the Han Dynasty. The l\·hole decree is utterly impossible as a document of
             Japanese History at this period. It is as Chinese as it can be.
               • That is, a tax of animals' skins and game to be paid by the men, and of
             textile fabrics to be levied on \VOnlen. See Ch. K., p. 182,
                            SUlIK.                           161

and raIn came in their season, the hundred kinds of grain
formed duly. Families did not become extinct, population \\Tas
sufficient. Profound peace prevailed in the Empire. There-
fore he received the title of" The Emperor, the august founder
of the country."
   17th year, Autumn, 7th month, 1St da)T. The following B.C. 81.
              .   d                                                V. 16.
decree was Issue : -
    "Ships are of cardinal importance to the Empire. At
present the people of the coast, not having ships, suffer
grievously by land-transport. Therefore, let every province be
caused to have ships built."
    Winter, lotp month. The building of ships was begun.
   48th year, Spring, 1st month, loth day. The Emperor gave B.C. So.
command to Toyoki no Mikoto and Ikume no Mikoto, say-
ing :-" Ye, my t,\'O children, are alike in Our affection, and We
know not which of you to make Our successor. Do each of
you dream, and We will form an augur~y from your dreams."
 Hereupon the two princes, having received this command,
performed their ablutions and prayed. In their sleep each of
them had a dream. The next dawn the elder brother, Toyoki
no Mikoto, reported to the Emperor the story of his dream,
 saying :-" I myself ascended Mount Mimoro, and turning to
 the East, eight times 1 flourished a spear, and eight times dealt
 blows \\rith a sword."
    The younger brother, Ikume no Mikoto, reported the stor),'
 of his dream, saying :-" I myself ascended to the summit of
 Mount Mimoro, and stretched a cord to the four quarters with
 which to drive away the sparrows which fed upon the
 grain."
    The Emperor compared the dreams, and spake to his two
 sons, saying :-" The elder of you turned to the East only, and
 it is therefore meet that he should rule the Eastern Land. But
 the younger looked down generally over the four quarters, and
 he ought therefore to succeed to Our Dignity."
     Summer, 4th month, 19th day.          Ikume no Mikoto was
  appointed Prince Imperial, and Toyoki no Mikoto was made
  ruler of the Eastern Land. He was the first ancestor of the
  Kimi of Kami-tsuke 1 and of the Kimi of Shimotsuke.

                            N 0\," K6dzuke.
              J26                           NIHONGI.

:B c.   38.     60th year, Autumn, 7th month, 14th day.               The Emperor
 v. 17. addressed his ministers, saying :-" Take-hi-teru no Mikoto
                 Another version is Take-hina-tori or Ama-no-hina-
              tori.
         brought from Heaven the divine treasures and stored them in
         the Temple of the Great God at Idzumo. I wish to see them."
         Accordingly Take-moro-sumi, the ancestor of the Yata-be no
         Miyakko, was sent for them
                 One writing says :-" Also called Oho-moro-sumi."
         that he might lay them before the Emperor. Now at this time
         Idzumo Furune, the ancestor of the Idzumo no Omi, held
         charge of the divine treasures. He had gone to the Land of
         Tsukushi and did not corne to meet him. His younger brother,
         Ihi-iri-ne, accordingly received the Imperial command and
         entrusted them to his younger brother, Umashi-Karal-hisa and
         his son Uka-tsuku-nu, and so rendered them up to the Emperor.
         Now when Idzumo Furune returned from Tsukushi and heard
         that the divine treasures had been rendered up to the Court, he
         rebuked his younger brother Ihi-iri-ne, saying :-" Thou shouldst
         have waited for some days. What wert thou afraid of that thou
         didst so lightly part with the divine treasures?" On this account
  v. 18. he still, after years and months had passed, cherished wrath
         against his younger brother and had a mind to slay him. So
         he deceived his younger brother, saying :-" Of late the mo 2
         plant grows plentifully in the Yarrtiya pool. Pray let us go
         together and see it." So he followed his elder brother and
         went there. Before this, the elder brother had secretly made
         a wooden sword, in appearance like a real sword, which at this
         time he himself wore. The younger brother was girt with a
         real sword. "Then they both came to the head of the pool,
         the elder brother said to the younger :-" The water of the
         pool is limpid and cool; pray let us both bathe in it." The
         younger brother agreed to his -elder brother's proposal, and
         they each took off the sword which he wore and laid it on

                 1 Note the occurrence of Kara, the name of a Corean King·doln, in a

              proper name at a time when it was riot supposed that Japan had relations
              with CO"rea.
                2 Defined as "a water plant with round leaves and stems \\,hich vary in

              length accordIng to the depth of the water.'''' It is edible.
                                  SUlIN.                                    J26

the bank of the pool. Having bathed in the water, the elder
brother came first to land, and taking the younger brother's
real sword, girded it on himself. Afterwards the younger
brother, surprised, took up his elder brother's wooden sword,
but on coming to mutual blows, the younger brother was
unable to draw the wooden sword. So the elder brother smote
his younger brother, Ihi-iri-ne, and killed him. Therefore the
men of that day made a song, saying,-
                 The sword girt on
                 By the \varrior of IdzUll10
                 (Where many clouds arise 1)_
                 There is the sheath en\\round with creepers,
                 But, alas! there is no blade.

   Hereupon Umashi-Kara-hisa and Uka-tsuku-nu proceeded to
Court, where they reported this affair in detail. Accordingly,
Kibi-tsu-hiko and Takenu-kaha-wake were sent to put to death
Idzumo Furune. Therefore the Omi of Idzumo, in dread of
this, desisted for a while from the worship of the Great God.
   Now a man of Higami, in Tamba, named Hika-tohe, made
a representation to the Prince Imperial, Iku-me no Mikoto,
saying :-" One of my children is a young infant. Yet of his own V. 19·
accord he has said this :--' These are the Gods worshipped by
the men of Idzumo-Idzumo of the geln-like water-plant 2 and
the sunken stone 3 -viz. the true-kind-beautiful-august-mirror,
the pinion-flapping-beautiful-august-God, the bottom-treasure-
august..treasure-master; the august-spirit-plunged-in-the-water-
of-the-mountain-stream, the peacefully-wearing (j ewels ?) -august-
deity, the bottom-treasure-august-treasure-master.' 4 These do
not seem like the words of a young infant. May they have
been spoken by divine inspiration? "
   Hereupon the Prince Imperial reported to the Emperor, who
accordingly caused them to be worshipped.
   62nd year, Autumn, 7th month, 2nd day. The following B.C. 36.
edict was issued : -
   "Agriculture is the great foundation of the Empire. I t is

     , See above, p. 54.
     2 The mo, above referred to.
     3 Perhaps a precious stone found at the bottonl of rivers.

     4 The Shiki says that this is the description of t\\·o deities only.
       J26                                NIHONGI.

         that upon which the people depend for their subsistence. 1 At
         present the ,vater of Hanida of Sayama in Kahachi is scarce,
         and therefore the peasants of that province are remiss in
         their husbandry. Open up therefore abundance of ponds and
         runnels, and so develop the industry of the people.~'
            \Vinter, loth month. The Yosami pond ,vas made.
            11th month. The I~arusaka pond and the Sakahori pond
         "",ere made.
                 One version has :-" These three ponds ,,,,ere l1lade
               ,vhen the Emperor d,velt in the Palace of Kuhama .....
E.C. 33.    65th year, Autumn, 7th month. The I_and of Imna ~ sent
 V.20.
         Sonaka-cheulchi and offered tribute.       Imna is more than
         2000 ri to the north of Tsukushi, fronl "rhich it is separated by
         the sea. It lies to the south-west of Ke-rin.
            In the 68th year of his reign, Winter, the 12th month, 5th
         day, the Emperor died at the age of 120.3
            In the following ~year, Autumn, the 8th month, 11th day, he
         "yas buried in the Misasagi above the road at Yamanobe.

         1 The above t\'."o sentences are copied \vord for \vord (raIn a Ch incsc
       history.
         2 The traditional Japanese pronunciation of this natne is :\lilnana.      I have
       follo\ved here, as elsewhere, the Corean pronunciation of Corcan proper
       naOles. On any estinlate of the length of the ri, the distance given is far
       too g"reat.
          111ula or M inlana is also kno\vn as I{ara. I t is a s111all king-dolH lying to
       the S."T. of the River Naktong.
          Kerin, in Japanese Kirin, is another nanlC for Silla (in Japanese Shinra
       or Shiragi). See" Early Japanese History" in "J.A.S.T.':' p. 43.
          Sonaka-cheulcbi looks like a genuine Corean name.
         3 The age given here is inconsistent "'ith other data found in the

       " Nihongoi " itself, and with the" Kojiki," 'rhich tnakes hin1 168 at the titne
       of his death.
                               BOOK VI.

              THE   E~IPEROR     IKU-?\fE-IRI-HIKO-I-SACHI.


                         (SUININ 1 TENNO.)

THE Emperor Iku-lue-iri-hiko-i-sachi was the third child of the
Emperor Mimaki-iri-hiko-iniye. The Empress his mother
was called ~Iimaki-hime. She was the daughter of Oho-hiko
no Mikoto. The Emperor \vas born in the Palace of Midzu-
gaki in the 29th year of the Emperor Mimaki, the 50th year
of the cycle, Spring, the 1st month, the 1st day. From his
birth he was of a distinguished appearance; when he grew to
manhood, he had superior talent and large principles. His
disposition \vas to be guided implicitly by truth and to avoid
dissimulation.
  The Emperor loved him, and retained him near his own
person. At the age of t\venty-four,:? in accordance with the
prognostic of a dream, he made him Prince Imperial.
  The Emperor Mimaki-iri-hiko-iniye died in Winter, the 12th
month of the 68th year of his reign.
  1st ~year, Spring, 2nd day. The Prince Imperial assumed l:,C. 29.
the Imperial Dignity.
   \Vinter, loth month, 11th day.a The Emperor Minlaki ,vas V'I.2,
buried in the Misasagi over the road at Yamanobe.
   11th month, 2nd day. The Empress was granted the

  1  Dispense-benevolence.
  2  This does not agree \vith ,vhat precedes. He \vas born in the 29th year
of his fathers reign, and made Prince Inlperial in the 48th. He would
therefore be only twenty, and not twenty-four. Note that the Japanese
always count both the year of birth and the current year in their calculations
of age.
  :~ This does not agree \"ith the date on the previous page.
       166
       J26                            NIHONGI.

         honorary title of Grand Empress. This was the year Midzu-
         noye Tatsll of the cycle.
B.c. 28.    2nd year, Spring, 2nd month, 9th da~y. Saho-hime \\yas
         appointed Empress. She gave birth to Homu-tsu-wake no
         Mikoto. From his birth the Emperor loved him, and kept him
         near his own person. When he grew to manhood, he could
         not speak.
           Winter, loth month. The capital was removed to Maki-
         muku. It was called the Palace of Tamaki. In this year the
         man of Imna, Sonaka cheulchi,l asked permission to return to
         his country. Therefore gifts were liberally bestowed on him,
         and there were entrusted to him as a present for the King of
         Imna 100 pieces of red silk. But the Silla people waylaid and
         robbed him, and at this time began the enmity between the
         two countries. 2
                 One account say's :-" In the reign of the Emperor
              Mimaki, there was a man with horns on his forehead 8 ",rho
              came riding in a ship and anchored in the Bay of Kebi in
              the land of Koshi. Therefore that place was called
              Tsunoga! He was asked what countryman he was. He
              replied, saying :-' I am the son of the King of Great Kara.
 VI.3.         My name is Tsunoga arashito, and I am also called Ushiki
              arishichi kanki. 5 It having come to my ears that there is
              in the Land of Japan a sage Emperor, I \vished to offer

         ! Corean pronunciation.    The Japanese \\'ould be Sonaka shichi.
         ~ There is probably some historical foundation   for this. But the chrono-
       logy must be wrong. According to the Tongkanl, Kara (Imna) was not
       formed into a kingdom until A.D. 42, and hostilities between Kara and Silla
       are first mentioned in that work in A.D. 94- They ,,,ere also at war
       in 97, 115, 116, and 203. See "Early Japanese Historyn in "J.A.S.T.,"
       P·44·
          :J The ancient Chinese Elnperors are so depicted.
           4 Now Tsuruga in Echizen.    A derivation frOl1l Tsuno-nuka (horn-fore-
       head) seelns intended .
          .; The Chinese characters in the text are probably intended to be read
       with their Japanese pronunciation, and I have accordingly in this instance
        followed the traditional Kana rendering. If the Corean pronunciation were
       followed, v{e should read Tonoka Arasateung and Usaki ari cheulchi kanki.
       The Shiki says that kanki is a Silla rank equal to the Japanese senior 3rd
       rank. Fronl a passage in Keidai Tenno's reign, year 23, it would appear
       that Arashito, or Arasateung, ,vas the nalne of S01l1C office or dignity.
                               SUININ.                             167
      him my allegiance and came to Anato.' 1 Now in that land
      there was a man named Itsutsu-hiko, ,vho spoke to thy
     servant, saying :-' I am the King of this land, and there
      is no other king but me. Do not thou therefore proceed
     further.· But when I observed him closely and saw what
     manner of man he ,vas, I knew surely that he was not a
     king. So I departed again from that place, and not
     knowing the road, anchored at one island and bay after
     another, going round by way of the Northern Sea and
     passing the Land of Idzumo until I arrived here."
         It so happened that at this time the Emperor died, so
     he was detained and served the Emperor Ikume for three
     years.
         Then the Emperor inquired of Arashito, saying :-" Dost
     thou wish to return to thy country?" He answered and
     said :-" I earnestl~y desire to do so." The Emperor then
     addressed Arashito, saying :-" If thou hadst not lost thy
     way, thou wouldst certainly have arrived here sooner-in
     time to serve the late Emperor. Do thou, therefore, change
     the name of thy country. In future take the august name VI. 4-
     of the Emperor Mimaki and make it the name of thy
     country. So he gave Arashito red silk stuffs and sent him
     back to his native land. This was the reason why the
     name of that country is called Mimana. 2 Hereupon Ara-
     shito took the red silk which had been given him, and
     stored it in the magazine of his country. The people of
     Silla hearing this, raised an arm~y and proceeding thither
     robbed him of all the red silk. This was the beginning of
     the enmity between these t\\lO countries."
         One writing says :-" In the beginning, when Tsunoga
     Arashito was still in his own land, he ,vent into the country
     with an ox loaded with implements of husbandry. The
     ox suddenly disappeared, and seeking for it by its tracks, he
     found that the foot-prints ceased in a certain village.
     Now there was here an old man who said :-' The ox
     \vhich thou art in search of entered this village, and the

  1 Anato, lit. hole-door, is the ancient nanle of Nagata (long-door) or
Choshiu. The door is the Strait of Shinl0noseki.
 ~ Imna, according to the Corean pronunciation of the characters.
                                                              N
       168
       J26                              NIHONGI.

             village chiefs said :-" '\7ith the implements ,vhich he is
             carrying let us fell the ox. \\,e must surely prepare to
             slay and eat him. If the O\\Tner comes in search of him,
             \ve shall indenlni(y him ,vith something." So they slew
             and ate him. If thou art asked ,\~hat thing thou desirest
             as the price of the ox, do not ask for treasures, but say'
             that thou ,vishest to have the God \vorshipped by the
             village. Tell them so.' Presently the village chiefs came
             and said :-' \\'hat dost thou desire as the price of thy'
             ox ?' .l\nd he replied as the old man had instructed him.
              N ow the God \vhom they \vorshipped was a \\t?hite stone..
             So they gave the white stone to the owner of the ox, and
             he accordingl)r brought it away ,vith him and placed it in
             his bed-chamber. This divine stone became changed into
 VI. 5·      a beautiful maiden, upon \vhich Arashito was greatly re-
             joiced, and ,vished to be uniteci to her. But \vhile 11e \vas
             away in allother place, the nlaiden suddenly disappeared.
             Arashito was greatly alarmed, and inquired of his "vife,
             saying :-' \Vhither has the maiden gone?' She replied
             and said:-' She has gone to\vards the East.' So he
              \vent in search bf her~ and at length, drifting far over the
              sea, he thus arrived in our country. The maiden whom
              he sought came to Naniha, "vhere she became the Deity of
              the Himegoso shrine. Then proceeding to the district at
              Kusaki, in the Land of Toyo, she aftervvards became the
              Deity of the Himegoso shrine. She is \vorshipped in both
              these places."
B.C. 27.   3rd year, Spring, 3rd month. The Silla prince, Ama no
         hi-hoko,l arrived. The objects which he brought were-one
         Ha-buto gem, one Ashi-daka gem, one red-stone Ukaka gem,
         one Idzushi short sword, one Idzushi spear, one sun-mirror,
         one Kuma-himorogi,~seven things in all. These \vere stored in
         the Land of Tajima,S and made divine things for ever.


         1 This Ineans "The sun-spear of Heaven/' and is purely Japanese.             It
       cannot be a Corean name
         :1 Kunla-hilnorogi.   See above, p. 82.
         3 In the district of Idzu-shi (which I take to be (or Idzu-ishi, sacred stone),
       a name \vhich is suggestive of stone..\vorship. The" Kojiki " Inentions eight
       objects, not at all the saine, ho\vever, and calls thenl the Eight Great
                                  SUININ.                                   J26

        One version says :-" In the beginning, Ama no hi-hoko, \TJ. 6.
     riding in a ship, anchored at the land of Harima, where
     he dwelt in the village of Shisaha. Then the Emperor
     sent to Harima Ohotomo nushi, the ancestor of the Miwa
     no Kimi, and Nagaochi, the ancestor of the Yamato no
     Atahe, and inquired of Ama no hi-hoko, saying :-' Who
     art thou, and to what country clost thou belong?' Ama
     no hi-hoko answered and said :-' I am the son of the King
     of Silla. Hearing that in the Land of Japan there was a
     sage monarch, I gave my country to my younger brother,
     Chiko,t and have come to offer my allegiance and to bring
     tribute of the following objects, viz.-a Ha-boso 2 gem, an
     Ashi-daka gem, an Ukaka red-stone (or Akashi) gem, an
     Idzushi short sword, an Idzushi spear, a sun-mirror, a
     Kuma-himorogi, and an Isasa sword-eight objects in all.'
     So the Emperor gave orders to Ama no hi-hoko, saying:-
     'Do thou dwell in either of these two villages-Shisaha
     in the land of Harima, or Idesa in the island of Ahaji,
     at thy pleasure.' Then Ama no hi-hoko addressed the
     Emperor, saying :-' In regard to a dwelling-place for thy
     servant, if the celestial favour is bestowed on him so far as
     to grant thy servant the place of his desire, thy servant
     will himself proceed to# and visit the various provinces, and
     he hopes that he may be granted the place which is agree-
     able to his mind.' This \vas agreed to. Thereupon Ama
     no hi-hoko, ascending the river Uji, went northwards,
     until he arrived at the village of Ana, in the province of
     Ohomi.
        Afterwards, he proceeded onwards, from the province of
     Ohomi, through the province of Wakasa, and going \vest-
     \vard arrived at the province of Tajima. So there he

Deities of Idzushi. Vide Ch. K., p. 26 I. Possibly the Idzushi short s\vord
and the Idzushi spear ,,,ere stone ,veapons. This passage is one of several
evidences that Japan o\ves to Corea one element of the Shinto religion.
The "Yengi-shiki" mentions several Corean Gods as being \vorshipped in
Japan. The" Kojiki " Inixes up this legend·,vith that of .A.rashito given above.
Indeed both are probably founded on the san1e occurrence.
  1 I can't find any king of this nan1e in Silla History.

  ~ Ha-boso Jneans leaf-slender and Ashi-daka le~-high rrhey are probably
nan1es of places.
        J26                             Nll-lONGI.

               fixed his d\velling-place. Therefore the potters of Kagami
               no hasama,l in the province of Ohomi, are the servants of
 VI. 7·        Ama no hi-hoko. Accordingly' Ama no hi-hoko took to
               \\~ife Mata\\~o, the daughter of Futomimi, a man of Idzushi
               in Tajima, \vho bore to him Tajima Morosuke, who ,vas
               the father of Tajima no Hinaraki, ,,~ho ,,~as the father of
               Kiyohiko, \\Tho \\~as the father of Tajima-mori."
B.C. 26.    4th year, Autumn, 9 th month, 23 rd day. The Empress's
         elder brother b~y the mother's side, Prince Sahohiko, plotted
         treason and tried to endanger the State. Therefore he watched
         for an occasion when the Empress ,vas enjoying her leisure,
         and addressing her, said as follows :-'~ Whom dost thou love
         best-thy elder brother or thy husband?" Upon this, the
         Empress, ignorant of his object in making this inquiry, straight-
         ,yay ans,vered and said :-" I love m)~ elder brother." Then
         he enticed the Empress, saying :-" If one serves a man by
         beaut~y, \VlIen the beauty farles, his affection \vill cease.
                                                                       2
                                                                         There
         are now many beautiful women in the Empire. The~y will
         come one after another and seek affection. Ho\\", then, canst
         thou trust al\vays to thy beauty? It is m~y \\Tish, therefore, to
         ascend to the immense felicity,:~ and of a certain(y to rule over
         the Empire along \vith thee. So making high our pillo\"s, 4 \ve
         shall complete a long hundred }'"ears. Would not this be
  VI. 8. delightful?      I beg thee, therefore, to sla)~ the Emperor for me.'~
          So he took a dagger, and giving it to the Empress, said:-
          "Gird on this dagger among thy garments, and \vhen the
          Emperor goes to sleep, do thou stab him in the neck, and thus
          kill him." Upon this the Empress trembled in her heart
          \vithin, and knew not what she should do. But in vie\v of the
          determination of the Prince, her elder brother, she felt that
          remonstrance would be useless. Therefore she took the dagger,
          and having herself no\\,here to deposit it, she placed it in her
          garments, intending all the \\rhile to relTIOnstrate ,\~ith her elder
          brother.
B.C. 25.     sth year~ Winter, loth month, 1st day. The Emperor pro-


                 1 Mirror-valley.                         ~ A Chinese saying.
                 :~i.e. to take possession of the throne.
                 4 A Chinese Inetaphor lueaning "in sectlrity.~;
                                SUINIX.                        IiI

ceeded to Kume, \vhere he dwelt in Taka-miya. " 1 N o\\' the
Emperor took his noon-da)? sleep ,vith the Empress's knees as
his pillov;. LT p to this time the Empress had accomplished
nothing, but thought vainl)? to herself :-" This \vould be the
time to do that which the Prince, my elder brother, plotted:'
And she "vept tears which fell on the Emperor's face. The
Emperor woke up and addressed the Empress, sa)?ing :--" To-
day We have had a dream. A small brocade-coloured snake
coiled itself round Our neck and a great rain arose from Saho,
\vhich coming hither wet OUf fa~e. What does this portend? "
The Empress thereupon, kno\vi~g that she could not conceal
the plot, in fear and awe bowed herself to the earth, and
informed the Emperor fully of the circumstances of the Prince,
her elder brother's, treason. Accordingly she addressed him,
saying: -" Thy handmaiden ,vas unable to resist the purpose
of the Prince, her elder brother, and yet could not be false to
the gratitude due to the Emperor. If I confessed I destroyed
the Prince, m:y elder brother.       If I said nothing, I over-
 turned the temples of the earth and of grain,2 so that on
 the one hand there was fear, and on the other there \,'as
grief.    Whether I looked up or down there was lamenta- VI. 9·
tion, \\'hether I advanced or retired there \vas \veeping and
 \vailing. Night and day I was disturbed in mind, and could
 find no \vay to give information. Only to-day' \vhen Your
 Majesty went to sleep with his handmaiden's knee as a pilla""
 she thought-' If I were mad enough to accomplish the pur-
 pose of my elder brother, at this very time the deed could be
 done without difficulty.' \Vith this thought still in Illy mind,
 the tears flo\ved spontaneously'. So I raised my sleeve to \vipe
 a\\'a)' the tears, and the:y overflowed from the sleeve and
 moistened Your ~lajesty's face. Therefore the dream of to-dayr
  must have been an effect of this thing. The small brocade-
  coloured snake is nothing else than the dagger which \vas given
  me: the great rain ,vhich arose suddenly is nothing else than
  th)· handmaiden's tears." Then the Emperor addressed the
  Empress) saying :-" This is not th)· crime," and raising a force
  from the neighbouring district, he comnlanded Yatsunada, the

              I    'Taka-Iniya lneans high-palace or shrine.
              :l   A Chinese expression for the State.
        J26                             NIHONGI.

          remote ancestor of the I\.imi of Kodzuke, to slay Saho-hiko.
          Now Saho-hiko \vithstood him with an army, and hastily piling
          up rice-stalks made thereof a castle, which was so solid that it
          could not be breached. This is what was called a "rice-castle." 1
          A month passed, and yet it did not surrender. Hereupon the
          Empress, grieved at this, said :-" Even though I am Empress,
          with what countenance can I preside over the Empire, after
          bringing to ruin the Prince, my elder brother?" Accordingly,
          she took in her arms the Imperial Prince Homutsu wake no
           Mikoto, and entered the rice-castle of the Prince, her elder
          brother. The Emperor increased his army still more, and
          having surrounded the castle on all sides, proclaimed to those
          within it, saying :-" Send forth quickly the Empress and the
          Imperial Prince." But they would not send them out. So the
\''1. 10. General Yatsunada set fire to the castle. Then the Empress,
          taking in her bosom the Imperial child, crossed over the castle
          and came out from it. Therewithal she besought the Emperor,
          saying :-" The reason why thy handmaiden at first fled into
          her elder brother's castle was in the hope that her elder brother
          might be absolved from guilt for the sake of her and of her
          child. But now he has not been absolved, and I know that I
          am guilty. Shall I have my hands tied behind my back? There
          is nothing left for me but to strangle myself. But even though
          I, thy handmaiden, die, I cannot bear to forget the favour
          shown me by the Emperor. I pray, therefore, that the
          Empress's palace, which I had charge of, may be granted to
          fair mates for thee. In the land of Tamba there are five
          ladies, all of virtuous minds, the daughters of the Prince, who is
          Michi no Ushi 2 of Tamba.
                  PrInce Michi no U shi was a grandson of the Emperor
               Waka-Yamato-Neko oho-hi-hi, and son of Prince Hiko-
               lmasu.


         1 The Japanese word for rice·castle is inaki.       It ll1ay be doubted whether
       there ever was any such castle as that described here. Artless attenlpts at
       derivation furnish a considerable portion of the old tnyths and legends of
       Japan. Inaki is the ternl used for the Imperial granaries in the provinces,
       and was also applied to their custodians. I t therefore becanle a title of
       nobility which is frequently met \,..jth in the later history.
         2 Lit. luaster of the road.
                                SUININ.                                 173
        One version has :-" Son of Prince Hiko-)"u-musubi-
      kuma."
Let them be placed in the side courts to complete the number
of the consort chambers." To this the Emperor agreed. l Then
the fire blazed up, and the castle \\l'as destroyed. The troops
all ran away, and Saho-hiko and his younger sister died together
inside the castle. Thereupon the Emperor commended the
good service of General Yatsunada, and granted him the name
of Yamato-hi-muke take-hi-muke-hiko 2 Yatsunada.
   7th year, Autumn, 7th month, 7th da)T. The courtiers repre- B.C. 23.
sented to the Emperor as follows :-" In the village of Taima a VI. II.
there is a valiant man called Kuyehaya of "faima. He is ot
great bodily strength, so that he can break horns and straighten
out hooks. He is always saying to the people :-' You may
search the four quarters, but \\l'here is there one to compare
with me in strength? 0 that I could meet with a man ot
might, with whom to have a trial of strength, regardless of life
or death.' "
   The Emperor, hearing this, proclaimed to his ministers,
saying :-" We hear that Kuyehaya of Taima is the champion of
the Empire. Might there be anyone to compare with him? "
   One of the ministers came forward and said :-" Thy servant
hears that in the Land of Idzumo there is a valiant man named
Nomi no Sukune. It is desirable that thou shouldst send for
him, by way of trial, and match him with Kuyehaya."
   That saine day the Emperor sent Nagaochi, the ancestor of
the Atahe of Yamato, to summon Nomi no Sukune. There-
upon Nomi no Sukune came from Idzumo, and straightway he
and Taima no Kuyehaya were made to wrestle together. The
two men stood opposite to one another. Each raised his foot
and kicked at the other,4 when Nomi no Sukune broke \\l'ith a
kick the ribs of Kuyehaya and also kicked and broke his loins
and thus killed him. Therefore the land of Taima no Kuyehaya
was seized, and was all given to Nami no Sukune. This \\"as

    But did not act on it till nine years later!
  2 Yamato-sun-facing brave-sun-facing prince.
  a In Yamato.
  " The \vrestling seems to have been of the nature of a Greek 1raylCpaTLOJ',
or the French savate.
        Ii4
        J26                              NIHONGI.

           the cause why there is in that village a place called Koshi-ore-
           da, i.e. the field of the broken loins.
VI. 12.       N ami no Sukune remained and served the Emperor.
B.C. 15.      15 th year, Spring, 2nd month, loth day. The five women of
           Tamba were sent for and placed in the side-court. The name
           of the first was Hibasu-hime, of the second N uba-tani-iri-hime,
           of the third Matonu-hime, of the fourth Azami-ni-iri-hime, and
           of the fifth Takano-hime. 1
              Autumn, 8th month, 1St day. Hibasu-hime no Mikoto was
           appointed Empress, and the Empress's three younger sisters
           were made concubines. Only Takano-hime, on account of the
           ugliness of her form, was sent back to her o\vn country.
           Accordingly in her shame at being sent back, when she came
          to Kadono, she purposely tumbled from the carriage and was
           killed. Therefore that place received the name of Ochi-kuni. 2
           T"he present name, Oto-kuni, is a corruption of this. The
           Empress Hibasu-hime no Mikoto had three sons and two
          daughters. The eldest was called Ini-shiki-iri-hiko no Mikoto,
          the second Oho-tarashi-hiko no Mikoto, the third Oho-nakatsu-
          hime no Mikoto, the fourth Yamato-hime no Mikoto, and the
          fifth Wakaki-ni-iri-biko no Mikoto. The concubine Nuba-tani-
          iri-hime gave birth to N uteshi-wake no Mikoto and Ika-tarashi-
          bime no Mikoto. The next concubine Azami-ni-iri-bime gave
VI. 13_ birth to Ike-haya-wake no Mikoto and Waka-asa-tsu-hime no
          Mikoto.
 B.C. '].    23rd year, Autumn, 9th month, 2nd day'. The Emperor
          addressed his ministers, saying :-" Prince Homutsu-\vake is now
          thirty years of age. 3 His beard is eight span long, y'et he weeps
          like an infant, and never speaks. What can be the reason
          of this?" So he caused Commissioners to consider the matter.
             Winter, loth month, 8th day. The Emperor stood before
          the Great Hall, with the Imperial Prince Homutsu-wake in
          attendance on him. Now there was a swan which crossed the
          Great Void, uttering its cry. The Imperial Prince looked up,

           1 The " Kojiki" (vide Ch. K., p. 197) 11lakes only four princesses, and in

       another passage only t\vo.                         2 Fall-country.

          3 The" Kojiki " makes this Prince born at the tilne of Saho-hiko's rebellion,

       i.e. in the fifth year of Suinin Tenno's reign. The" Nihongi " is less precise,
       but it is plain from the narrative that he cannot have been thirty at this time.
                                   SUININ.                                   Ii 5
and seeing the swan, said :-" What thing is this?" The
Emperor, observing that the Imperial Prince had gained his
speech on seeing the swan, was rejoiced, and commanded his
courtiers, saying :-" Which of you \\rill catch this bird and
present it to me?" Thereupon, Amano Yukaha Tana, the
ancestor of the Tottori 1 no Miyakko, addressed his ~Iajesty,
saying :-" Thy servant will surely catch it, and present it to
thee." So the Emperor declared to Yukaha Tana, saying :-" If
thou present this bird to me, I will certainly reward thee
liberally." No\v, Yukaha Tana, looking from afar towards the
quarter whither the swan had flown, followed in search of it to
Idzumo and there captured it.
        Some say" To the land of Tajima."                          VI. 14.
   11th month, 2nd day. Yukaha Tana presented the swan to
the Emperor. Homutsu-wake no Mikoto played with this s\\ran
and at last learned to speak. Therefore, Yukaha Tana was
liberally re\varded, and was granted the title of Tottori no 1vIi-
yakko. 2 In consequence there was further established the Be
of bird-catchers, the Be of bird-feeders,3 and the Homu-tsu Be.
   25th year, Spring, 2nd month, 8th day. The Emperor com- B.C. 5.
manded the five Daibu," Takenu Kaha-wake, ancestor of the
Abe no Omi, Hiko-kuni-fuku,5 ancestor of the Wani no Omi,
Oho-kashima, ancestor of the Nakatomi no Muraji, Tochine,
ancestor of the Mononobe no Muraji, and Take-hi, ancestor of
the Ohotomo no ~luraji, saying :-" The sagacity of our pre-
decessor on the throne, the Emperor Mimaki-iri-hiko-iniye,
was displayed in wisdom: he was reverential, intelligent and
capable. He ,vas profoundly unassuming, and his disposition
was to cherish self-abnegation. He adjusted the machinery of
 Government, and did solemn worship to the Gods of Heaven VI. 15.
and Earth. He practised self-restraint and was ,vatchfuI as to

  1 Tottori for tori-tori, i.e. bird-catcher, is the name of a number of places in

Japan, notably of the capital of the province of Inaba.
  2 Lord of the bird-catchers.         The Chinese character for title is ft,
"rhich tneans properly falllily name, surnalne. But, as this instance shows,
such appellations \vere primarily official designations. Then they becanle
hereditary titles, and in the last place \vere attenuated into mere surnalnes.
  3 Tori-kahi-be.      .. Daibu, great man, is a general term for high officials.
  5 Both these 11len are nanled in 5iijin Tenno's reign, loth year, eighty-five

years before.
       J26                             NIHONGI.

         his personal conduct. Every day he was heedful for that da:y.
         Thus the ,veal of the people was sufficient, and the Empire was
         at peace. And now, under Our reign, shall there be any re-
         missness in the ,vorship of the Gods of Heaven and Earth? " 1
            3 rd month, loth day. Ama-terasu no Oho-kami was taken
         from Toyo-suki-iri-hime no Mikoto,2 and entrusted to Yamato·
         hime no Mikoto. Now Yamato-hime no Mikoto sought for a
         place where she might enshrine the Great Goddess. So she
         proceeded to Sasahata in U da. Then turning back from
         thence, she entered the land of Ohomi, and went round east-
        ,vards to Mino, whence she arrived in the province of Ise.
VI. 16.     Now Ama-terasu no Oho-kami instructed Yamato-hime no
         Mikoto, sa)Ying :-" The province of Ise, of the divine wind,3 is
        the land whither repair the waves from the eternal world, the
        successive waves. It is a secluded and pleasant land. In this
        land I wish to dwell." In compliance, therefore, with the
        instruction of the Great Goddess, a shrine was erected to her
        in the province of Ise. Accordingly' an Abstinence Palace
        ,vas built at Kaha-kami in Isuzu. This was called the palace of
        Iso. It was there th·at Ama-terasu no Oho-kami first descended
        from Heaven.
                  One story is that the Emperor made Yamato-hime no
               Mikoto to be his august staff,' and offered her to Ama-
               terasu no Oho-kami. Thereupon Yamato-hime no Mikoto
               took Ama-terasll no Oho-kami, and having enshrined her
               at Idzu-kashi no Moto in Shiki,6 offered sacrifice to her.
               Thereafter, in compliance with the Goddess's instruc-
               tions, she, in Winter, the loth month of the year Hinoto

          I This   speech is thoroughly Chinese. It contains numerous phrases
      borrowed from the Chinese classics.
         2 She had been appointed B.C. 92, eighty-seven years before.

         a This is a stock epithet (makura kotoba) of this province.
         oJ Abstinence Palace or Worship Palace.         ., On the accession of an
      Emperor, an unnlarried Princess of the In1perial House was selected for the
      ser\yice of the Shrine of Ise, or if there was no such unmarried Princess,
      then another Princess was fixed upon by divination and appointed ,vorship-
      princess ( . X). ffhe \\Torship-Palace ,vas for her residence." Shinto
      nlionl0ku ruijiusho, I I I. 23. See above, note to p. 4 I.
         :; i e. assistant or deputy.
        6 In Yamato.        Idzu Ineans sacred; kashi is the nanle of a tree; moto
      means bottom.
                              SUININ.                               177

   Mi,l on the 18th day, removed to the Palace' of Watarahi
   in the province of Ise. At this time the Great God of VI. 17·
   Yamato inspired Ohominakuchi no Sukune, the ancestor of
   the Hodzumi no Omi, and admonished (the Emperor by his
   mouth), saying :-" At the time of the Great Beginning, it
   \vas covenanted that Ama-terasu no Oho-kami should
   govern all the Plain of Heaven, and that her august
   Imperial descendants should hold absolute rule over the
   eighty spiritual beings of the Central Reed-plain Land.
   lVly personal tenure of the governance of the great land is
   already at an end. But although the \vorship of the Gods
   in Heaven and Earth was maintained by the late Emperor
    Mimaki, he failed to search out the root of the matter in
   its details; he was wanting in thoroughness, and stopped
   short at the leaves and branches. Therefore that Emperor
    was short-lived. 3 For this reason do thou, our august
   descendant, now show regret for the shortcomings of the
    late Emperor and be watchful in regard to the ceremonies
    of worship. If thou dost so, the life of thine augustness
    will be long, and moreover the Empire will have peace."
       Now \vhen the Emperor heard these \vords, he cause::l
    Fukayu nushi, the ancestor of the Nakatomi no Muraji, to
    use divination in order to discover who should be appointed
    to conduct the worship of the Great God of Yamato.
    Thereupon N unaki-waka-hime no Mikoto answered to the
    divination, and was consequently appointed. A sacred
    plot of ground was fixed on in the village of Anashi, and
    worship performed at Point 4 Naga-oka of Oho-chi. But
    this Nunaki-waka-hime no Mikoto's body was already all
    emaciated, so that she "vas unable to do sacrifice, and
    therefore Nagaochi no Sukune, ancestor of the Yamato no
     Atahe, was made to offer the sacrifices.
  26th year, Autumn, 8th month, 3rd day. The Emperor R.C.4·

  1  Corresponding to the 26th year of Suinin Tenno's reign, or B.C. 4-
  2  Or shrine.
  a He died at the age of 120, or 168 if we take the "Kojiki" as an
authority. This is one of numerous indications that the chronology of
this period is \vorthless.
  4 The word nlisaki (point) is used both of a promontory and of a spur of

a hill. Naga-oka is long-hill.
        J26                             NIHONGI.

         commanded the Mononobe, Tochine no Oho-muraji,l saying:-
VI. 18. "  We have repeatedly despatched messengers to the Land of
         Idzumo to inspect the divine treasures of that Land, but we have
         had no clear report. Do, thou go thyself to Idzumo, and having
         rna-de inspection, attest them." So Tochine no Oho-muraji,
         having examined and attested the divine treasures, made a
         clear report thereof to His Majesty. He was accordingly
         appointed to the charge of the divine treasures.
 B.C. 3.    27 th year, Autumn, 8th month, 7th day. The Department
         of Worship was made to ascertain by divination what imple-
         ments of war would be lucky as offerings to the Gods. Conse-
         quently bows, arrows, and cross-swords were deposited in the
         shrines of all the Gods. The land and houses consecrated to
         their service were fixed anew, and they were sacrificed to in
         due season. The practice of offering weapons in sacrifice to the
         Gods of Heaven and Earth probably had its origin at this time.
         This year granaries were erected in the village of Kume.:
 B C. 2.    28th year,Winter, loth month, sth day. Yamato-hiko no Mi.
         koto, the Emperor's younger brother by the mother's side, died.
            11th month, 2nd day. Yamato-hiko was buried at Tsuki-
         zaka in Musa. Thereupon his personal attendants were
         assembled, and were all buried alive upright in the precinct
         of the misasagi. For several days they died not, but wept and
         wailed day and night. At last they died and rotted. Dogs
         and crows gathered and ate them.
VI. 19.     The Emperor, hearing the sound of their weeping and
         wailing, was grieved in heart, and commanded his high
         officers, saying :-" It is a very painful thing to force those
         whom one has loved in life to follow him in death. Though it
         be an ancient custom, why follow it, if it is bad? From this
         time forward, take counsel so as to put a stop to the following
         of the dead." 3

            1Great-village-elder. This \vord is nearly equivalent to Prilne Minister.
            2As explained above, Kume is probably a variant of the Chinese word
        for army. There is at present a village of this name in Yanlato, but it was
        no doubt originally the barrack quarter, and the storehouses here referred to
        were to contain grain for the food of the army. The original comnlentary
        gives miyake as the Japanese nan1e for these granaries. At a later period
        tbe miyake \vere local government offices.
           3 The" Kojiki" (Ch. K., p. 174) says that this was the first time a hedge of
                                   SUININ.                                  Ii9
  30th year, Spring, 1st month, 6th day. The Emperor A.D. I.
commanded Inishiki no Mikoto and Oho-tarashi-hiko no

 l1len was set up round a tUlnulus. But the" N ihongi's " statement that it
 was an old custom must be correct.
    This custom is too Inuch in accordance with what we kno\v of otber races
 in the barbaric stage of culture to allo\v us to doubt that 'we have here a
 genuine hit of history, though perhaps the details may be inaccurate, and
 the chronology is certainly wrong. In an ancient Chinese notice of Japan
 \ve read that " at this tinle (A.D. 247) Queen Himeko died. A great mound
 \vas raised over her, and more than a hundred of her male and female
 attendants followed her in death."
    Funeral human sacrifice for the service of the dead is described by Dr.
 Tylor (" Primitive Culture," i. 458) as " one of the most wide-spread, distinct,
and intelligible rites of animistic religion. Arising in the lower barbaric
 stage, it develops itself in the higher, and thenceforth continues or dwindles
 in survival." He proceeds to quote numerous exanlples of it fronl all parts
 of the world, and frotn Inany ages of history.
    It is well kno\vn to have existed among the Manchu Tartars and othel-
 races of North-Eastern Asia until lTIodern times. The Jesuit missionary
 Du Halde relates that the Emperor Shunchi, of the T'sing dynasty (died
 1662), inconsolable for the loss of his wife and infant child, "signified by his
 will that thirty men should kill themselves to appease her manes, which cere-
 mony the Chinese look upon with horror, and was abolished by the care of
 his successor "-the fatnous Kanghi.
    Another Inissionary, Alvarez Selnedo, in his history of the Tartar inva-
sion, says :-" The Tartarian King vowed to celebrate his Father's Funerals
 with the li\yes of t\VO hundred thousand of the inhabitants of China. For it
is the custome of the Tartars, \vhen any man of quality dieth, to cast into
that fire which consumes the dead corpse as many Servants, Women and
 Horses with Bo\vs and Arrows as nlay be fit to atend and serve thenl in the
next life."
    This custom was also practised in China in the nlost ancient tilnes, though
long condenlned as barbarous. Confucius disapproved of it. An ode in
the" Sheking " (Legge, iv. i. 198) lalnents the death of three brothers who
were sacrificed at the funeral of Duke Muh, B.C. 621. When the Emperor
She H\vang-ti died, B.C. 20<), his son Urh said, " My father's palace ladies
\vho have no children must not leave the tomb," and compelled them all to
follow him in death. Their number was very great. For other cases see a
paper by Mayers in the Journal of the North China Branch of the Asiatic
Society, new Series, xii.
   A King of Kokuryo in Corea died A.D. 248. He was beloved for his
virtues, and many of his household \vished to die with him. His successor
forbade them to do so, saying that it \vas not a proper custom. l\1any of
them, however, committed suicide at the tomb. "Tongkam," iii. 20.
    In A.D. 502 , Silla prohibited the cUSt0111 of burying people alive at the
       180
       J26                             NIIIONGI.

          Mikoto, saying :-" Do ye each tell me the thing ye would
          .dearly like to have." The elder Prince said :-" I should like
          to have a bow and arrows." The younger Prince said :-" I
          should like to have the Imperial Dignity."        Thereupon the
           Emperor commanded, saying :-" Let the desire of each of you
          be complied with."       So a bow and arro\vs were given to
           Inishiki no Mikoto, and a decree was addressed to Oho-tarashi
          hiko no Mikoto, saying :-" Thou must succeed to Our
           Dignity."
 A.D. 3·      32nd year, Autumn, 7th month, 5th day. The Empress
           Hibasu-hime no Mikoto died.
                  One version has Hibasu ne no Mikoto.
           Some time before the burial, the Emperor commanded his
           Ministers, saying :-" We have already recognized that the
           practice of following the dead is not good. What should no\\"
           be done in performing this burial?" Thereupon N ami no
           Sukune came forward and said :-" It is not good to bur)! living
           men upright at the tumulus of a prince. How can such a
           practice be handed down to posterity? I beg leave to propose
           an expedient which I ,viII submit to Your Majesty." So he
           sent messengers to summon up from the Land of Idzumo a
           hundred men of the clay-workers' Be. He himself directed the
          men of the clay-workers' Be to take clay and form therewith
'"'I. 20. shapes of men, horses, and various objects, which he presented
           to the Emperor, saying :-" Henceforward let it be the law for
           future ages to substitute things of clay for living men, and to
           set them up at tumuli." Then the Emperor ,vas greatly rejoiced,
           and commanded Nomi no Sukune, saying :-" Thy expedient
           hath greatly pleased Our heart." So the things of clay were
           first set up at the tomb of Hibasu-hime no Mikoto. And a


       funerals of the sovereigns. Before this time five men and five ,vomen were
       put to death at the King's tomb. "Tongkam," v. 5.
          Cases of suicide at the tOlnb of a beloved lord or sovereign have not been
       uncomlnon in Japan even in modern times. There was one in 1868.
          The Japanese, like the Chinese, Inake no distinction between voluntary
       deaths and human sacrifices. Both are called jun-shi, a term which means
        "following in death." Indeed, as \ve may see by the Indian Suttee, it is
        often hard to draw the line bet\\7een these t\VO forms of what is really the
        same custom.
                                 SUININ.                                18 r

name was given to these clay objects.                 They were called
Bani-'llJa.!
       Another name is Tatemono. 2
   Then a decree was issued, saying :-" Henceforth these clay
figures must be set up at tumuli: let not men be harmed.                    H



The Emperor bountifully rewarded Nami no Sukune for this
service, and also bestowed on him a kneading-place, and
appointed him to the official charge of the clay-workers' Be.
His original title was therefore changed, and he was called
Hashi no Omi. This was how it came to pass that the Hashi
no Muraji superintend the burials of the Emperors. 3
   The said Nomi no Sukune was the first ancestor of the Hashi VI. 21.
no ?vIuraji. 4
   34th year, Spring, 3rd month, 2nd day. The Emperor made A.D. S·
a progress to Yamashiro. At this time his courtiers represented
to him that there was in that country a beautiful person named
Kambata no Tohe.o She was very handsome, and was the
daughter of }4"'uchi of Ohokuni in Yamashiro. Hereupon the
Emperor, spear in hand, made a vow, saying :-" I must be
united to this beautiful person." On his way he saw an omen.

  I  Clay-rings.                             2 Things set up.

  J  The date ascribed to this incident cannot be depended on. At least
Chinese accounts speak of the custom of human sacrifices at the burial of a
sovereign as in full force in Japan so late as A.D. 247. Probably all the
events of this part of Japanese history are very much antedated. But of the
substantial accuracy of the narrative there can be no doubt. Some of these
clay figures (kno\vn as tsuchi-ningio) are still in existence, and one Inay be
seen in the British Museum, \\-"here it constitutes the chief treasure of the
Gowland collection. rrhe Uyeno Museum in Tokio also possesses specimens,
both of men and horses. None, however, remain in situ at the tombs. The
hani-wa (clay-ring) cylinders which luay now be seen embedded in the
earth round all the principal misasagi are so nunlerous that they can hardly
have all been surlnounted by figures. But they are of the same worknlan-
ship and of the same date, and no doubt some of theln are the pedestals of
itnages, the above-ground part of \vhich has been long ago destroyed by
the weather or by accident.
   A similar substitution of straw or wooden images for living nlen took
place in China in ancient tilnes, though by a curious inversion of ideas, the
forlner practice is described as leading to the latter. See Legge's" Chinese
Classics, Mencius," p. 9.
   4 Hashi (clay-\vorker) is also read hanishi, hashibe, or hasebe.
   b As above stated, Tohe means chief:
J26                             NIIIONGJ.

\Vhen he ,vas arriving at his lodging,l a large tortoise came out
from the river. The Emperor raised his spear and thrust at.




           Tsuchi-ningio.    (Gowland Collection, British Museum.)

the tortoise, when it suddenly became changed into a white
stone. Then the courtiers said :-" If one were only to think
                       I   Literally, travelling-palace.
                                SUININ.                                  J26

this out, it must prognosticate something." So Kambata no
Tohe was sent for, and lodged in the hinder palace. She was
the mother of Iha-tsuku-wake no Mikoto, who was the ancestor
of the Kimi of Miho. Before this he had taken to wife Kari-
hata-tohe, who bore him three sons. The first was called Oji-
wake no Mikoto, the second Ika-tarashi-hiko no Mikoto, and
the third I..take-wake no Mikoto.
   Ika-tarashi-hiko no Mikoto was the first ancestor of the Kimi VI. 2%.
of Ishida.
   35th year, Autumn, 9th month. Inishiki no Mikoto was A.D. 6.
sent to the province of Kahachi to construct the pond of
Takashi, and the pond of Chinu.
   Winter, loth month. He made the pond of Saki in Yamato,
and the pond of Tomi. In this year, the various provinces
were commanded extensively to excavate ponds and channels,l
 to the number of eight hundred and more. Much attention
 was thus paid to husbandry. Therefore the people enjoyed
 abundance, and the Empire was at peace.
   37th year, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. Oho-tarashi-hiko no A.D. 8.
 Mikoto was made Prince Imperial.
   39 th year, Winter, loth month. Inishiki no Mikoto, while A.D. 10.
 dwelling in the palace at Kahakami of Udo in Chinu, made a
 thousand swords. Therefore those swords were called the
 Kahakami set.
        Another name was the Naked! Companions.
 They were deposited in the shrine of Iso no kami. After this VI. 23.
 the Emperor gave orders to Inishiki no Mikoto, and made him
 to have charge of the divine treasures of the shrine of Iso no
 kami.
         One version is :-" Whilst the Imperial Prince Inishiki
      dwelt at Kahakami of Udo in Chinu, he sent for a smith
      by name Kahakami, and made a thousand swords. At
      this time, the shield-makers' Be, the Japanese-figured-cloth-
      workers' Be, the sacred-bow-shavers' Be, the sacred-
      arrow..makers' Be,S the Oho-anashi Be, the Hatsu-kashi"


  1 For irrigation.                : So called because worn without a sheath.
  S See above, p. 178.
 .. These are the natnes of villages. The " Shukai " editor suggests that they
were allotted to the Prince for his support.
                                                                   o
        J26                          NIHONGI.

              Be, the jewel-workers' Be, the Kami-osaka Be/ the Hi-oki 2-
              Be, and the sword-wearers' Be-the Be of ten articles
              altogether-were granted to the Imperial Prince Inishiki.
                These thousand swords were deposited in the village of
              Osaka. They were afterwards removed from Osaka and
              deposited in the shrine of Iso no kami. At this time the
              God made a request, saying :-' Let the person named
              Ichikaha, of the family of the Onli of Kasuga, be made to
              attend to them.' Therefore by the Emperor's command,
·VI. 2~.      Ichikaha ,vas caused to attend to them. He was the first
              ancestor of the Mononobe a no Obito.·'
A.D. 58.    87th year, Spring, 2nd month, 5th day. Inishiki no Mikoto
         spake to hi'S younger sister, Oho-naka-tsu-hime no Mikoto,
         saying :-" I am old, and unable to have charge of the divine
         treasures. Henceforward thou must have charge of them."
         Oho-naka-tsu-hime refused, sa:ying :-" I am a feeble woman.
         How can I ascend to the divine storehouse of Heaven? "
            Inishiki no Mikoto said :-" Although the divine storehouse"
         is high, I can make for the divine storehonse a ladder. ' How,
         then, should it be hard to ascend to the storehouse?" Hence
         the proverbial saying, "You can ascend even to the divine
         storehouse of Heaven, if you only plant a ladder." This was
         its origin. Ultimately Oho-naka-tsu-hime no Mikoto gave
         them to Mononobe no Tochine no Oho-mur~ji, and made
          him to have charge of themo. Therefore the Mononobe no
          Muraji retain charge of the divine treasures of Iso no kami
          up to the present time. The above \\~as the origin of this
         practice.
            Formerly in the Land of Tamba, in the village of Ku,vada,
          there was a man whose name was Mikaso. Now, in Mikaso's
          house there ,vas a dog, by name A~yuki. This dog bit a wild
                                O


          animal called the 11tUj ilza,o and killed it. In the animal's belly
          there was found a magatama of Yasaka gem. This gem was

          1  Osaka ,vas the place where the s\vords \\'ere stored.
          2  Hi-oki Ineans "daily offerings."
          3 The Mononobe were In1perial life guards.

          .. One of tHese storehouses, dating froin the 8th century, may still be
        seen at T6daiji, Nara. It is raised on pillars SOlne ten feet above the
        ground.
          6 A kind of badger.
                                 SUIKIN.                           J26

accordingl,Y offered to the Emperor, and is no\v in the shrine of
Iso no kami.                                                         VI. 25·
   88th year, Autulnn, 7th month, loth day. The Emperor A.D. 59.
commanded the Ministers, saying :-" \Ve hear that the
divine treasures \vhich the Silla Prince Ama no hihoko brought
with him \vhen he first came here are no\\" in Tajima. They
were originall~y made divine treasures because the people of that
province sa\v that they \\'ere admirable. \Ve desire to see
these treasures." That same day messengers were despatched
\vith the Imperial commands to I{iyo-hiko, great-grandson of
Ama no hihoko, directing him to present them to the Emperor.
Thereupon, Kiyo-hiko, \\Then he received the Imperial orders,
brought the divine treasures himself, and laid them before His
 Majesty. There ,vas one Ha-buto gem, one Ashi-daka gem,
one Uka no Akashi (red-stone) gem, one sun-mirror, and one
 Kuma-himorogi. 1 But there \vas one short s\\"ord called Idzushi, 2
which it suddenly occurred to I<iyo-hiko not to offer to the
 Emperor; so he concealed it in his clothing, and wore it him-
self. The Emperor, una\\'are of the circumstance of the con-
cealment of the short s\yord, and \vishing to be gracious to
 !(iyo-hiko, sent for him and gave him sake in the palace.
 Then the short s\vord appeared from among his garments and
 became visible. The Enlperor saw it, and himself asked
 Kiyo-hiko, saying :-" \'That short s\vord is that in thy cloth-
 ing?" Then J(iyo-hiko, seeing that he was unable to conceal
 the short s\vord, explained that it belonged to the divine
 treasures \\"hich he \vas laying before the Emperor. So the
 Emperor said to Kiyo-hiko :-" Ho\v is it possible for this
 divine treasure to be separated from its kind?" So he took it
 out and presented it to the Emperor, and all \vere deposited in
 the Sacred Treasury. After\vards, \vhen the Sacred Treasury
 \vas opened and inspected, the short s\vord had spontaneously
 disappeared. Accordingly, a messenger was sent to Kiyo-hiko,
 who inquired of him, saying :-" The short sword which thou
 hast presented to the Emperor has suddenly disappeared.
  Has it perchance come to th)" place?" I{iyo-hiko ans\vered, VI. 26~
 and said :-" Last night the short s\vord came of its o\vn
 accord to th)~ servant's house; but this morning it has dis-

        1   Cf. above, p. 168.                Cf. above, p. 168.
       186                            NIHONGI.

           appeared." The Emperor was struck with awe, and made no
           further endeavour to find it. Afterwards the Idzushi short
           sword went of its own accord to the Island of Ahaji, where
           the people of the island considered it a God, and erected for
           the short sword a shrine, in which it is worshipped until this
           day.
              Formerly there was a man, who riding in a ship, cast anchor
           in the land of Tajima. He was therefore asked, saying:-
           " Of what country art thou?" He answered and said :-" I
           am a son of the king of Silla, and my name is Ama no
           hihoko. So he dwelt in Tajima, and took to wife Mata no
           wo, daughter of Mahetsu mimi [One version has Mahetsu
           mi and another Futo-mimi] of that province, who bore to
           him Tajima Morosuke, the grandfather of Kiyo-hiko.
A.D. 61.      goth year, Spring, 2nd month, 1st day. The Emperor
           commanded Tajima Mori to go to the Eternal Land 1 and
           get the fragrant fruit that grows out of season, now called
           the Tachibana. 2
A.D. 70.      99th year, Autumn, 7th month, 14th day. The Emperor
           died in the Palace of Maki-muku at the age of 140,8 and in
           Winter, the 12th month, the loth day, ,vas buried in the
           misasagi of Fushimi, in Suga-hara.
 '~I. -27.    The next year, Spring, the 3rd month, the 12th day, Tajima
            Mori arrived from the Eternal Land, bringing of the fragrant
           fruit that grows out of season eight sticks and eight bundles. 4
              Thereupon Tajima Mori wept and lamented, saying : -

                       " Receiving the Celestial Cburt's command,
                         Afar I went to a remote region:



          1 Tajima Mori \vas apparently selected for this mission on account of
        his descent from a king of Silla. But the Takoyo no Kuni, or Eternal
        Land, c~n hardly have been Corea, \\There the Orange is little, if at all,
        grown in the present day. It was n10re likely China.
          " The Orange, vide Ch. K., p. 198.
          8 The chronology, as usual, will not bear investigation.
          4 The meaning of the characters which I have thus rendered is doubtful.
        The corresponding passage in the " Kojiki" is corrupt and equally obscure.
        I do not feel sure that Motoori has cleared it up quite satisfactorily, in
        spite of the amount of recondite learning he has brought to bear on it.
           er. Ch. K., p. 199-
                               SUININ.                                 J26

       Ten thousand ri I crossed the ,vavcs,
       Distantly I passed over the \veak ,vater}
       This Eternal Land
       Is no other than the Inysterious reahn of Gods and Genii
       To \vhich ordinary nl0rtals cannot attain;
       Therefore in going thither and returning
       Ten years have naturally passed.
       Beyond my expectation, I braved alone the towering billo\\'s,
       Turning Iny way again to\vards my o\\'n land.
       Thus, trusting in the spirits of the Elnperors,
       I hardly accolnplished my return.
       13ut no\v the Emperor is dead,
       I am unable to report my mission.
       Though I should remain alive,
       \Vhat lnore \vould it avail me ?" ~

Then turning his face towards the misasagi of the Emperor,
he wept aloud, and so of himself he died. When the ministers
heard of it they all shed tears.
  Tajima Mori was the first ancestor of the Miyake 3 no
Muraji.

   1 Said by the Chinese to be north of Fuyu (in Manchooria). It does not
support ships.
   2 The sentiment and diction of this speech are thoroughly Cbinese.  It
is not exactly poetry, but nearly so.
   3 Miyake, \vritten with characters   which nlean "three storehouses."
Mi, however, is n10re probably the honorific prefix.
                                    BOOK VII.

               THE EMPEROR OHO-TARASHI-HIKO-OSHIRO-WAKE.


                                (/(E1/(0 1 TENNO.)

         THE Emperor Oho-tarashi-hiko-oshiro-wake was the third
         child of the Emperor Iku-me-iri-hiko-isachi. The Empress
         his mother "Tas named Hibasu-hime no Mikoto. She was the
         daughter of Prince Michi no ushi of Tamba. The Emperor
         Iku-me-iri-hiko-isachi, in the 37th year of his reign, raised him
         to the rank of Prince Imperial. He was then t\ve~ty-one
         )?ears of age. In the 99th year of his reign, Spring, the second
         month, the Emperor Iku-me-iri-hiko-isachi died.
A.D. 71.    1st )"ear, Autumn, 7th month, 11th day. The Prince Imperial
         assumed the Imperial Dignity·. The chronological epoch ,vas
         altered accordingly. This year was the year Kanoto Hitsuji
         (8th) of the CIrcle.
A.D. 72.    2nd :year, Spring, 3rd month, 3rd day. The elder lady ~ of
         Inabi in Harima \\-"as appointed Empress.
                 Another version has :-" The younger lady of Inahi in
               Harima."
 \'II.2.    She had t,,"o sons, the first of whom \vas named the Imperial
         Prince Oho-usu, and the second \\l'o-usu no lVfikoto.
                 In one \vriting it is said :-" The Empress bore three
              sons. The third was named the Imperial Prince Waka-
              Yamato-neko. "
            The Imperial Prince Oho-usu and Wo-usu no Mikoto \vere
         born as t\vins 3 on the same day \vith the same placenta. The

         1 Great road or great conduct.                 t Oho.. iratsulne.
         3 There seems to have been a question 'which of t\vins was to be con-
       sidered the elder. One idea was that the last born should be senior, because
       he occupied the higher place in the womb.
                                   KEIKO.                                  189
                                                                            J26

Emperor, wondering at this, informed the mortar" Therefore
he gave these two Princes the names of Great ~Iortar (Oho-
usu) and Little Mortar (Wo-usu). Now this \Vo-usu no
Mikoto was also called Yamato W oguna and again Yamato-
dake no Mikoto.~ Whilst a child he had a manly spirit; \vhen
he arrived at manhood his beauty was extraordinary. He \vas
a rod in height, and his strength was such that he could lift a
tripod. 3
   3rd year, Spring, 2nd month, 1st day. Divination \vas made A.D. 73.
as to whether the Emperor should make a progress to the
Land of Kii to perform sacrifices to all the Gods of Heaven and
Earth. It was found to be unlucky, and the Imperial car \vas
accordingly countermanded.        Ya-nushi-oshiho-dake-\vo-goro

   1 The Chinese character used here is ii, \\'hich properly means a pestle,

and is more particularly applied to that arrangement of a 1110rtar and pestie
in \vhich the latter is set on a pivot and \\Torked
by the foot. This is called the Kara-usu in
Japan. Here, however, is one of those cases
\vhere we must put aside the Chinese character
and be guided by the Japanese \vord, \vhich is
unquestionably usu, a ternl applied to any
arrang-ement for hulling or grinding grain.
The usu is properly the mortar rather than the
pestle (kine), but it is used {or the combination
of both, and for querns or hand-lnills, ,vhich
are also in use in Japan.
   The usu here referred to is probably of the
kind shown in the annexed illustration. Stone
pestles resembling in shape that in the right
hand upper corner are among the stone im-
plements figured in Kanda's work on this
subject.
   Hardy, in his" Manual of Buddhism," p. 158,
says :-" The eastern pestle is found in every
house, and is connected \vith as many super-
stitions and ceremonies as the besom alnong             Pestle and l\lortar.
the old wives of Europe."
   The" Shukai " editor suggests that by Great Mortar and Little :\lortar the
lower and upper stones of the hand-mill \vere meant. But there is no
reason to doubt the statelnent below (A.D. 610) that hand-tnills ,"ere first
introduced in Suiko's reign.
   2 Woguna means boy, Yamato-dake nleans hero ot Yamato.            It is by the
last of these names that he is best known to posterity.
   3 A Chinese phrase.
           19°                            NIHONGI.

          no Mikoto [one version has Take-wi-goroJ was sent and caused
'TIL 3.   to do sacrifice. Hereupon Ya-nushi-oshiho-dake-wo-goro no
          Mikoto went thither, and stayed at Kashihara in Abi, where he
          sacrificed to the Gods of Heaven and Earth. He lived here
          for nine years, and took to wife Kage-hime, the daughter of
          Uji..hiko, who was the ancestor of the Ki no Atahe. 1 She was
         the mother of Takechi no Sukune.
A.D. 74.    4th year, Spring, 2nd month, 11th da~y. The Emperor made
         a progress to Mino. His courtiers represented to him, saying : -
         " In this province there is a handsome woman named Oto-hime,
         of perfect beauty. She is the daughter of the Imperial Prince
         Yasaka Irihiko." The Emperor wished to obtain her to be
         his consort, and went to the house of Oto-hime. 2 Oto-hime,
         hearing that the Emperor was coming in his carriage, straight-
         way concealed herself in a bamboo-grove. Hereupon the
         Emperor provisionally caused Oto-hime to go and reside in
         the Kuguri Palace, and letting loose carp in a pond, amused
         himself by looking at them morning and evening. Now
         Oto-hime wished to see the carp sporting, so she came
         secretly and stood over the pond. The Emperor forthwith
         detained her, and had intercourse with her. Hereupon Oto-
         hime thought :-" The way of a husband and wife is the
         prevailing rule both now and of old time. But for me it is not
         convenient." So she besought the Emperor, saying :-" Thy
         handmaiden's disposition is averse to the way of conjugal
VII. 4. intercourse. Unable to withstand the awe of the Imperial
         commands, she has been placed for a while within the curtain.
         But it gives her no pleasure. Her face too is hideous, and she is
         unworthy of being added to the side courts. Thy handmaiden,
         however, has an elder sister, by name Yasaka Iri-hime, of a
         beautiful countenance, and also of a virtuous disposition. Let
         her be placed in the hinder palace." The Emperor assented,
         and having summoned Yasaka Iri-hime, made her his consort.
         She bore to him seven sons and six daughters. The name of

            1 In this passage the province now known as Kii is called indifferently
          Ifior Kii.
            2 Oto-hitne means silnply" younger lady." There are frequent cases in the
          " Nihongi" where a \voman seems to have no other name than "elder
          lady" or ':younger lady."
                                KEIKO.                              19°
the first was the Ernperor Waka-tarashi-hiko, of the second
the Imperial Prince Iho-ki Iri-hiko, of the third the Imperial
Prince Oshi-wake, of the fourth the Imperial Prince Waka-
Yamato-neko, of the fifth the Imperial Prince Oho-su-wake, of
the sixth the Imperial Princess Nunoshi, of the seventh the
Imperial Princess Nunaki, of the eighth the Imperial Princess
Ihoki no Iri-hime, of the ninth the Imperial Princess Kako-
yori-hime, of the tenth the Imperial Prince Isaki no Iri-hiko,
of the eleventh the Imperial Prince Kibi no Ye-hiko, of the
twelfth the Imperial Princess Takaki no Iri-hime, and of the
thirteenth the Imperial Princess Oto-hime.
   Again he took as consort the Lady 1 Midzuha, younger sister
of Ihaki-wake, of the Miho House, who bore to him the Imperial
Princess Ihono. His next consort, named Ikaha-hime, bore to
him the Imperial Prince Kami-kushi 2 and the Imperial Prince
Inase no Iri-hiko. The elder of these two, the Imperial Prince \111 5
Kami-kushi, was the first ancestor of the Miyakko of Sanuki.
The younger, the Imperial Prince Inase no Iri-hiko, was the
first ancestor of the Harima no Wake. 3 His next consort was
named Takada-hime, daughter of Kogoto of the Abe House,
\vho bore to him the Imperial Prince Take-kuni I<ori-wake.
He was the first ancestor of the Wake of Mimura, in the
Province of Iyo. His next consort, named Oho-tane-hime, of
Kami-naga in Hiuga, bore the Imperial Prince Hiuga no Sotsu-
hiko. He was the tirst ancestor of the Kimi of Amu." His
next consort, named Sotake-bime, bore the Imperial Prince
Kuni-chi-wake, the Imperial Prince Kuni-se-wake [one version
has the Imperial Prince Miya-chi-wake] and the Imperial
Prince Toyota-wake. The elder of these, the Inlperial Prince
Kuni-chi-wake, was the first ancestor of the Wake of Minuma.
The youngest brother, the Imperial Prince Toyo-to-wake, was
the first ancestor of the \Vake of the Province of Hi. a
   Now the children of the Emperor, male and female, from VII. 6.
first to last, numbered eighty in all. \Vith the exception,
however, of Yamato-dake no Mikoto, the Emperor Waka-

 1  Iratsulne.                       :I Divine-conlb.

 :I \Vake, separation, branch, was a title \vhich implied descent from the
Imperial line.
  & In Nagata.                        5 No"" Hizen and Higo in Kiushiu.
       J26                             NIIIONGI.

         tarashi-hiko and the Imperial Prince Ihoki no Iri-hiko, tIle
         other seventy and odd children were all granted fiefs 1 of
         provinces and districts, and each proceeded to his own province.
         Therefore, those who at the present time are called Wake of
         the various provinces are the descendants of these separated
         (wakare) Princes. 2
            In this month, the I~mperor, hearing that the daughters of
         Kambone, Mino no Miyakko, the elder's name being Ane-toho-
         ko, and the younger's being Oto-toho-ko, were both of distin-
         guished beauty, sent Oho-usu no lVIikoto ,vith orders to
         examine the countenance of these women. Now Oho-usu no
         Mikoto had secret intercourse with them, and did not report
         his mission. For this reason the Emperor was wrath with
         Oho-usu no Mikoto.
            Winter, the 11th month, 1st day. The Emperor returned
         from Mino and removed the capital to Maki-muku. This was
         called the palace of Hi-shiro.
A.D. 82.    12th year, Autumn, 7th month. The Kumaso 3 rebelled, and
         did not bring tribute.
VII. 7·     8th month, 15th day. The Emperor made a progress to
         Tsukushi."'
            9th month, 5th day. On arriving at Saha in Suwo, the
         Emperor, standing with his face to the south/) addressed his
         Ministers, saying :-" To the soutllwards, smoke rises abun-
         dantly. There must certainly be brigands there." So he
         halted, and sending in advance Take-moro-gi, ancestor of the
         Omi of Oho, U nade, ancestor of the Omi of Kusaki, and
         Natsu-bana, ancestor of the Kimi of the Mononobe, made them
         to reconnoitre. Now there was here a woman, by name

          1 This points to something like a feudal system.      But the analogy to
       European feudalism nlust not be too closely pressed. Cf. Ch. K., p. 203.
          2 This olnits to notice that Wake is a much older term.

          3 The country of the Kumaso was the southern part of the island of Kiu-
       shiu corresponding to the present provinces of Hiuga, Ohosumi, and Sat-
       suma. Kuma and So are the nalnes of t\VO tribes.
          .. Tsukushi is used in two senses. It SOlnetitncs stands for the v,'hole
       island of Kiusbiu, sometilnes for only the northern part of it, viz. the two
       provinces of Chikugo and Chikuzen.
          6 The Emperor of China stands with his face to the south on state occa-

       sions. But here it seelns only to mean that the Emperor looked southwards.
                                 KEIKO.                                  J93
Kamu-nashi-hime, whose followers were exceedingly numerous.
She \vas the chieftain of that whole country. When she heard
that the En1peror's messengers had arrived, she broke off
branches of the hard wood of Mount Shitsu. On the upper
branch 1 she hung an eight-span sword, on the middle branch
she hung an eight-hand mirror, and on the lower branch a
Yasaka jewel. She also hoisted a white flag on the bow of her
ship, and having come to meet them, addressed them, saying:-
" I beseech you, do not have recourse to arms. None of my
people, I assure you, are rebellious. They will presently
submit themselves to virtue. 2 But there are mischievous
brigands. The name of one is Hanatari. 3 He has assumed
an unauthorized title. In the mountains and valleys he has
called men together, and is encamped at Kahakami in Usa.
Another is called Mimi-tari." He is a mischievous brigand,
rapacious, frequently plundering the people. He dwells at
I(ahakami in Mike. The third is called Asa-hagi. He has VII. 8.
secretly assembled a following, and dwells at Kahakami in
Takaha. The name of the fourth is Tsuchi-wori-wi-wori.& He
lives concealed at Kahakami 6 in Midori no, and relying solely
on the difficulties of the mountains and rivers, plunders the
people greatly. All the places to which these four have betaken
themselves are strong places. Each of them therefore makes
his relations chiefs of one place, and they all say they ,viII not
obey the Imperial command. I pray you attack them suddenly,
and fail not."
   Hereupon Take-moro-gi and the others first enticed the
followers of Asa-hagi, and gave them presents of trowsers of
red material and all manner of curious objects. Then having
made them beckon to the four unsubmissive men, who came
accompanied by their followers, they seized them and put them
all to death.
   The Emperor ultimately pursued his journey to Tsukushi,
and arrived at the district of Nagawo in the province of Buzen,


  1 It was the ancient custom in Japan to deliver letters or presents fastened

to branches of trees.
     To the Emperor's virtuous influence.                   3 Nose-depend.
   4 Ear-depend.                       .. Earth-break-\\·ell-break.
   6 Kaha-kami means the upper course of a river.
       194                            NIHONGI.

        where he erected a travelling palace and dwelt there. There-
        fore the name of that place was called Miyako. l
           Winter, roth month. He arrived in the Land of Ohokida.
        The form of this region is wide and beautiful. Therefore it
        was called Ohokida. 2
           When he came to the village of Hayami, there was there a
        \voman named Haya-tsu-hime. She was chieftain a of one
        place. When she heard that the Imperial car was cOIning,
        she went out in person to meet the Emperor, and reported to
        him, saying :-" In this mountain there is a great cavern called
        the Rat's Cave. There are two Tsuchi-gumo" who dwell in
        this cave. One is called Awo,o and the other Shira. 6 Again
VII. ~. at Negino, in the district of Nawori, there are three Tsuchi-
        gumo. The name of the first is Uchi-zaru/ of the second
        Yata,8 and of the third Kunimaro. 9 These five men are alike
        mighty of frame, and moreover have numerous followers. They
        all say that they will not obey the Imperial command. If their
        coming is insisted on, they will raise an army and offer resist-
        ance." The Emperor, provoked by this, could not advance on
        his journey. So he halted at the village of Kutami, where he
        erected a temporary palace muro, and dwelt therein. Then he
        consulted with his Ministers, saying :-" Let us now put in
        motion a numerous army and slay the Tsuchi-gumo. If, fearing
        the might of our arms, they should conceal themselves in the
        mountains and moors, they will assuredly do future mischief."
        Accordingly he gathered camellia trees, and made of them
        mallets for weapons. Then selecting his bravest soldiers, he
        gave them the mallet-weapons. Therewith they pierced through
        the mountains, cleared away the grass, and attacking the
        Tsuchi-gumo of the cave,10 defeated them at Kahakami in
        Inaba. The whole band were killed, and their blood flowing
        reached to the ancle. Therefore the men of that day called

         1 Capital.                         ~ Great field.
         3 The reader will observe that there are nUlllerous cases of the" monstrous
       regiment of women" in these old legends.
         ~ See above, p. 129.               5 Green or blue.              6 \Vhite.

         7 Strike-monkey.                    8 Eight-fields.

         9 Country-fellow.   Note again that the Tsuchi-gumo have Japanese
       nalnes, and inhabit old-settled parts of Japan.
         10 The interlinear gloss has iha-lnuro, rock-muro.
                                  KEIKO.                               195
the place where the camellia mallets were made Tsubaki-no-
ichi,l and the place where the blood flowed they called Chida. 2
Then, in order to attack Uchi-zaru, he crossed straight over
Mount Negi. At this time the arrows of the enemy, shot cross- \TII. 10.
wise from the mountain, fell like rain in front of the Imperial
army. The Emperor retreated to Shiro-hara, where he made
divination on the river-bank, and accordingly arraying his
troops, he first attacked Yata on the moor of Negi, and defeated
him. Upon this Uchi-zaru felt that he could not gain the
victory, and prayed that his submission should be accepted.
This, however, was refused, and they all flung themselves into a
ravine and were killed. In the beginning, when t-he Emperor
was about to attack the enemy, he made a station on the great
 moor of Kashihawo. On this moor there was a stone six feet
in length, three feet in breadth, and one foot five inches in
thickness. The Emperor prayed, saying :-" If we are to
 succeed in destroying the Tsuchi-gumo, when we kick this
 stone, may we make it mount up like a Kashiha leaf." Accord-
 ingly he kicked it, upon which, like a Kashiha leaf, it arose to
the Great Void. Therefore that stone was called Homishi.s
 The Gods whom he prayed to at this time were the God of
 Shiga, the God of the Mononobe of Nawori, and the God of
 the Nakatomi of Nawori-these three Gods.
    11th month. He arrived at the Land of Hiuga, and erected
 a travelling palace, wherein he took up his residence. This
 was called the palace of Takaya.
    12th month, 5th day. Counsel was held how they should
 attack the Kumaso. Hereupon the Emperor addressed his
 Ministers, saying :-" We have heard that in the Land of the
 Kumaso there are two men named Atsukaya and Sakaya, who
 are the leaders of the Kumaso. Their followers are exceedingly VII. I J.
 numerous, and are called the eighty Rumaso braves. It will be
 better not ~o touch their spear-points. For if we raise a small
 force, it will be insufficient to exterminate the brigands, while if
 a large army is put in motion, the people will suffer harm. Is
 there no means of subduing this country without active
 measures, and without resorting to the might of arms?" Then

          1   Camellia market.                        I Blood-field.

                     3 For fumi-ishi, i.e. kicking-stone.
        19 6                               NIHONGI.

           one of the ministers stood forward and said :-" A Kumaso
           brave has two daughters, the elder named Ichi-fukaya, and
           the younger Ichi-kaya. Their beauty is perfect, and their hearts
           are brave. Offer valuable presents, and under the pretence of
           bestowing them beneath thy standard, take advantage of this
           to gain intelligence of the enemy, and attack them unawares.
           So without ever a sword-edge being stained with blood, the
          enemy \\rill surely yield themselves up." The Emperor gave
          command, saying :-" Let it be so." Thereupon the presents
          ,vere offered, and the two women, deceived by them, were
          bestowed beneath the tent. The Emperor straightway had
          intercourse with Ichi-fukaya, and made a show of affection for
          l1er. Then Ichi-fukaya told the Emperor, saying :-" Be not
          anxious lest the Rumaso should not submit. Thy handmaiden
          has an excellent plan. Let me have one or two soldiers to
          follow me." She then returned to her home, and prepared
          much strong ~ake, which she made her father drink. He be-
          came drunk and lay down to sleep. Ichi-fukaya then secretly
          cut her father's bowstring. Thereupon one of the soldiers who
          had escorted her came up and killed the Kumaso brave. The
          Emperor was provoked by such excessively unfilial conduct
          and put Ichi-fukaya to death. But Ichi-kaya he gave to the
\tII. 12. Miyakko of the Land of Ki.
A.D. 83.     13 th year, Summer, 5th month. The Kumaso country having
          1geen all subdued, the Emperor accordingly dwelt in the palace
          of Takaya. When he had lived there six years, there was a
          beautiful woman in that country named Mihakashi-hime. l So
          he took her and made her his concubine. She bore to him the
          Imperial Prince Toyo-kuni-wake. He was the first ancestor
          of the Mi}Takko of the Land of Hiuga.
A.D. f7.     17th year, Spring, 3rd month, 12th day. The Emperor
          made a progress to the district of Koyu,2 where he visited the
          little moor of Nimo. Then looking down towards the east, he
          said to his courtiers :-" This country faces directly the quarter
          of the Rising Sun." Therefore he named that country Hiuga. 8
          On this day he mounted upon a great stone in the middle of the
          moor, and feeling a longing for the capital, made this poetry:-

               1   The lady of the august sword.                    2   In Hiuga.
                                3 For Hi.muka, i.e. sun-fronting.
                                 K e ik o .                            197
                 Oh ! ho,v sweet!
                 From the quarter of my home,                                   ,rIl. 13.
                 Clouds arising come hither!
                 Yamato
                 Is the 1110St secluded of lands.
                 Yamato
                 Retired behind l\1ount Awo-gaki,
                 \Vhich encompasies it in its folds,
                 I s beautiful.
                 Let those \vhose lives are sound
                 Stick (in their hair) by way of headdress
                 Branches of the \vhite evergreen oak
                 Of Mount Heguri-
                 (Fold ,vithin fold).
                 This child ! 1

   This is called a song of longing for one's country.
                                                               A.n.
                                                               Α.Τ). R8.
                                                                     88.
   r8th year, Spring, 3rd month. The Emperor, when about to
turn his way towards the capital, made a tour of inspection to
the Land of Tsukushi.~ He first arrived at Hina-mori. There
was at this time on the bank of the River Ihase a crowd of
men assembled. The Emperor, looking down on them from
afar, addressed his courtiers, saying :-" Who are these men
 who are assembled? Are the~y an enemy?" So he sent two
 men, Hinamori the Elder and Hinamori the Younger, to
see. Now Hinamori the Younger returned and reported,
 saying :-" Idzumi-hime, the Kimi of Muro-kata, is about to Y l l . t±
 offer your Majesty a banquet, and therefore have people
 gathered together."
    Summer, 4th month, 3rd day. The Emperor arrived at the
district of Kuma. In this place there were two brothers called
 Kuma-tsu-hiko. 3 The Emperor first sent to summon Kuma
 the Elder to him. Accordingly he came along with the
 messenger. Then he summoned Kuma the Younger, but he
 would not come. Therefore he sent soldiers and put him to
 death.
  1 The text and interpretation of this poem present considerable difficulty,

and the above rendering is in parts only tentative. The" Kojiki" makes three
distinct poems of it, and attributes them to Yamato-dake no Mikoto. Cf.
Ch. K., p. 219. A\vo-gaki means green-fence. "Fold within fold" is a mere
epithet, or makura-kotoba! of 1\'lount I-Ieguri.
  2 Tsukusbi is here evidently the northern part of the island.

  :I Prjnce of Kuma.
        J26                            NIHONGI.

            11th day. Proceeding by the sea route, he anchored at
         a small island in Ashi-kita, where he partook of food. Then he
         told W o-hidari, ancestor of the Yama no Ahiko,t to give him
         some cold water. Just at this time there was no water in the
         island, and he did not know what to do. So looking up~ he
         prayed to the Gods of Heaven and the Gods of Earth, when
         suddenly a cool spring bubbled forth from the side of a cliff.
         Tllis he dre\v and put before the Emperor. Therefore that
         island was called Midzushima. 2 That spring still exists in the
         cliff of Midzushima.
            5th month, 1st day. Setting.sail from Ashikita, he proceeded
         to the Land of Hi.~ Here the sun went down, and the night
         being dark, they did not know how to reach the shore. A fire
         was seen shining afar off, and the Emperor commanded the
         helmsman, saying :-" Make straight for the place where the fire
VII. 15· is." So he proceeded towards the fire, and thus was enabled
         to reach the shore. The Emperor made inquiry respecting the
         place where the fire was, saying :-" What is the name of this
         village?" The people of the land answered and said:-
         "Toyomura, in the district of Yatsushiro." Again he made
         inquiry respecting the fire :-" Whose fire is this?" But no
         owner could be found, and thereupon it was known that it was
         not a fire made by man. Therefore that country ,vas called
         Hi no Runi!
          · 6th month, 3rd day.. He crossed over from the district of
         Takaku. to the village of Tamakina. At this time he killed a
         Tsuchi-gumo of that place called Tsudzura.
            16th day. He arrived at the Land of Aso. i The level tracts
         of that Land were wide and far-reaching, but no dwellings of
         men were to be seen. .The Emperor said :-" Are there any
         people in this country?" Now there were two Deities, one
         called Aso-tsu-hiko, and the other Aso-tsu-hime, who suddenly
         assuming human form, sauntered forward and said :-" We


         1 Ahiko appear~ to be a title sitnilar to Atahe, Sukune, etc. It is derived
       by the Japanese comlnentators from a, I, Iny, and hiko, prince.
         2 Water-island,.                       .      sNow Hizen and Higo.
         4 The Land of Fire.

         6 The name Aso is preserved in Mount Aso, a very curious volcanic

       mountain in the province of Higo.
                                   KEIKO.                                   199

two are here. How can it be said that there are no men?"
Therefore that place was called Aso. 1
   Autumn, 7th month, 4th day. He arrived at Mike 2 in the
further Land of Tsukushi,3 where he dwelt in the temporary
Palace of Takata. Now there was here a fallen tree 970 rods
in length. The hundred functionaries passed backwards and VII. 16.
forwards stepping on this tree. The people of that day made
a song, saying:-
                          The morning hoar-frost -I
                          August tree pole-bridge ~
                          The Lords of the Presence
                          Pass over it-
                          The august tree pole-bridge!

   The Emperor inquired, saying :-"'\;Vhat tree is this?"
There was there an old man who said :-" This tree is a
I(unugi tree. i Before it fell down, when the rays of the
morning sun fell on it, it overshadowed the Hill of Kishima;
,vhen the rays of the evening sun fell on it, it covered Mount
Aso." The Emperor said :-" This tree is a divine tree.
Therefore let this country be called the Land of Mike." 6
   7th day. He reached the district of Yame, where, crossing VIr. 17·
1vIount Mahe, he looked down to the south upon Aha no Saki,
and spake, saying :-" The peaks and glens of this mountain
follow each other fold upon fold. They are exceedingly
beautiful. May it be that a God dwells in this mountain?"
l~hen Saru-ohomi,7 the Agata-nushi of Minuma, represented to
the Emperor, saying :-" There is a female Deity named Yame-
tsu hime, who dwells always among these mountains." This is
therefore the reason why this country is called the Land of
Y~lne.
  8th month.        He arrived at the village of Ikuha,8 where he

  1   Aso is a dialectical variation for nanzo or nazo, how or why.
  2   August tree.                                   3 Now Chikugo.
   .. Morning hoar-frost is a makura-kotoba. The only connection bet\veen
it and the rest of the poenl is that hoar-frost Inelts, and that ke (for ki) tree
is also the first syllable of kesu, to melt. The Presence is of course the
Imperial Presence.
   [) Quercus Serrata, Hepburn.                  6 August tree.
   j Monkey-great-sea.                           S In Chikugo.

                                                                      p
        200                             NIHONGI.

            partook of food. On this day the stewards left behind the
            drinking cup. Wherefore the men of that day called the place
            where the drinking cup had been forgotten Ukuha. The
            present name Ikuha is a corruption of this. In old times the
            common people of Tsukushi called a drinking-cup Ukuha.
I .• D. 89-    19th year, Autumn, 9th month, 20th day. The Emperor
            arrived f~om Hiuga.
A.D. 90.       20th year, Spring, 2nd month, 4th day. The Princess
            Ihono was ffidde to sacrifice to Ama-terasu no Oho-kami.
A.D. 95·       25 th year, Autumn, 7th month, 3rd day. Takechi no
            Sukune was commissioned to inquire into the geography of the
            various provinces of the Northern 1 and Eastern 2 circuits and
            the condition of the people.
A.D. 97·       27t year, Spring, 2nd month, I2th day. Takechi no
            Sukune returned from the East Country and informed the
            Emperor, saying :_H In the Eastern wilds there is a country
VII. 18. called Hitakami. 3 The people of this country, both men and
            women, tie up their hair in the form of a mallet, and tattoo
            their bodies. They are of fierce temper, and their general
            name is Yemishi. Moreover, their land is wide and fertile.
            We should attack them and take it."
               Autumn, 8th month. The Kumaso again rebelled, and
            made unceasing inroads on the frontier districts.
              Winter, loth month, 13th day. Yamato-dake no Mikoto
            was sent to attack the Kumaso. He was at this time
            sixteen years of age. Thereupon Yamato-dake no Mikoto
            said :-" I desire to take with me some good archers. Where
            are there any good archers? " Some one told him, saying:-
            " In the province of Mino there is a good archer named Oto-
            hiko-gimi." Thereupon Yamato-dake no Mikoto sent Miyado-
            hiko, a man of Katsuraki, and summoned to him Gto-hiko-
            gimi. Therefore Oto-hiko-gimi came and brought with him
            Ishiura no Yokotachi, Tako no Inaki,· and Chichika no Inaki
            of the province of Ohari, and followed Yamato-dake no Mikoto
            on his expedition.
          1  Including Mutsu and Dewa.
          2  Or Adzuma, the region round what is no", Tokio.
           3 Sun-height.  So called from its eastern position.   Hi-tachi, sun-rise, is
        a name of similar purport.
          .a One of the lower ranks of the local nobili ty.
                             KEIKO.                     201


   12th month. Having arrived at the Land of Kumaso, he
inquired into the state of things, and the character of the
country in respect of facilities of access. N ow the Kumaso
had a leader named Torishi-kaya, also called the Brave of
Kahakami, who assembled all his relations in order to give VII. '9·
them a banquet. Hereupon Yamato-dake no Mikoto let down
his hair, and disguising himself as a young girl, secretly waited
until the banquet should be given by the Brave of Kahakami.
Then with a sword girded on him underneath his inner
garment, he entered the banqueting muro of the Brave of
Kahakami and remained among the women. The Brave of
Kahakami, enchanted with the beauty of the young girl, forth-
with took her by the hand, and made her sit beside him. He
also offered her the cup, and made her drink, and thus amused
himself with her. By and by the night grew late, and the com-
pany fewer. Also the Brave of Kahakami became intoxicated.
Hereupon Yamato-dake no Mikoto drew the sword which he
had in his inner garments, and stabbed the Brave of Kahakami
in the breast, but did not kill him outright. The Brave of
Kahakami, bowing down his head to the ground, said :-" Wait
a little. I have something to say." Then Yamato-dake no
Mikoto stayed his sword and waited. The Brave of Kahakami
addressed him, saying :-" Who is thine Augustness?" He
answered and said :-" I am the child of the Emperor Oha-
tarashi-hiko, and my name is Yamato Woguna." The Brave
of Kahakami again spake to him, saying :-" I am the strongest
man in all this land, and therefore none of the men of this time
can excel me in might, and none refuses to be my follower.
I have met with many valiant men, but none as yet could match
the Prince. Therefore this despicable robber, from his filthy
mouth, offers thine Augustness a title. Wilt thou accept it?"
 He said :-" I will accept it." So he spake to him, say-
ing :-" Henceforward in speaking of the Imperial Prince, let
 him be styled the Imperial Prince Yamato-dake." 1 When
he had done speaking Yamato-dake pierced his breast
 through and killed him. Therefore up to the present day
 he is styled Yamato-dake no Mikoto. This was the origin
 of it.

                   1   The Ch:llllpion of Japan.
        202                              NIHONGI.

             Afterwards he despatched Oto-hiko and the others, who slew
          all that band, leaving not a chewer/ and when this was
 VII. 20. done, he returned ~y sea to Yamato.        Arriving at Kibi, he
          crossed the Ana Sea. In this place there was a malignant
           Deity, whom he forthwith slew. Again, turning northwards,
          he arrived at N aniha,2 where he killed the malignant Deity of
          the Kashiha ferry.
 A.D. 98•    28th year, Spring, 2nd month, Ist day. Yamato-dake no
          Mikoto reported to the Emperor how he had subdued the
           Kumaso, saying :-" Thy servant, trusting in the Emperor's
          Divine Spirit,3 by force of arms, at one blow, suddenly slew the
           Kumaso chieftain and reduced that whole country to peace.
          In this ~Tay the V'l estern Land is now quiet, and the people
          are undisturbed. Only the God of the Ferry of Ana in Kibi
          and the God of the Ferry of Kashiha at Naniha, both, with
          mischievous intent, sent forth a poisonous vapour, by which
          travellers were plagued. Both of them formed centres of
          calamity. Therefore I killed all those evil Deities, and have
          thrown open the roads by land and water alike." The
          Emperor upon this commended the good service done by
          Yamato-dake no Mikoto, and bestowed extraordinary affection
          on him.
A.D. 110.    40th year, Summer, 6th month. There ,vas wide rebellion
          of the Eastern wilds, and the frontier was in a state of tumult.
             Autumn, 7th month, 16th day. The Emperor addressed his
          Ministers, saying :-" The Eastern country is now in an un-
          quiet state, and turbulent Deities have sprung up in numbers.
          Moreover the Yemishi have rebelled to a man and frequently
          carry off the people. Whom shall I send to still this disturb-
          ance?" But none of the Ministers knew whom to send.
          Then Yanlato-dake no Mikoto addressed the Emperor, say-
          ing :-" Thy servant it was who formerly performed the labour
          of the expedition to the West. This campaign must be the
          business of the Imperial Prince Oho-usu." But the Im'perial
          Prince Oho-usu was afraid, and ran to conceal himself among
          the grass. Accordingly a messenger was sent to fetch him.
          Hereupon the Emperor chid him, saying :-" If thou dost not

                &   i.e. a living soul.              2 The modern Ohosaka.
                                  8 Very nearly the Latin numen.
                                    KEIKO.                                  203

 wish it, shall We insist on sending- thee? \Vhy all this alarn1, \'"11. 21.
 whilst thou hast not yet confronted the enemy? " Accordingly
he eventually granted him Mino as a fief, and so he went to
his government. He was the first ancestor of the two houses
of the Kimi of Muketsll and the Kimi of Mari. Upon tllis
 Yamato-dake no Mikoto, striking a martial attitude, said:-
 "Not many years have passed since I subdued the Kumaso.
 Now the Yemishi of the East have made a fresh rebellion.
 When shall we arrive at a universal peace? Thy servant,
notwithstanding that it is a labour to him, will speedily quell
this disturbance." So the Emperor took a battle-axe,t and
giving it to Yamato-dake no Mikoto, said :-" We hear that
the Eastern savages are of a violent disposition, and are much
given to oppression: their hamlets have no chiefs, their villages
no leaders, each is greedy of territory, and they plunder one
another. Moreover, there are in the mountains malignant
Deities, on the moors there are malicious demons, who beset
the highways and bar the roads, causing men much annoyance.
Amongst these Eastern savages the Yemishi are the most
powerful, their men and women live together prorrliscuously,
there is no distinction of father and child. In winter they
dwell in holes, in summer they live in nests. Their clothing
consists of furs, and they drink blood. 2 Brothers are sus-
picious of one another. In ascending mountains they are like
flying birds; in going through the grass they are like fleet
quadrupeds. \Vhen they receive a favour, they forget it, but
if an injury is done them they never fail to revenge it. There-
fore they keep arrows in their top-knots and carry swords \TIL 22.
within their clothing. Sometimes they draw together their
fellows and make inroads on the frontier. At other times they
take the opportunity of the harvest to plunder the people. If
attacked, they conceal themselves in the herbage; if pursued,
they flee into the mountains. Therefore ever since antiquity
they have not been steeped in the kingly civilizing influences.
    1 Motoori points out this as an instance where the desire to imitate his

Chinese models has caused the author of the ".Nihongi" to introduce
Chinese things \\'hich have no business in a Japanese narrati\"e. The
" Kojiki" says it was a spear of holly eight fathoms long.
    2 The" Liki " speaks of the ancient Chinese living on fruits and the flesh of

~..ild beasts and drinking their blood.
        204                            NIHONGI.

         Now We mark that thou art mighty of stature and thy coun-
         tenance is of perfect beauty, thou hast strength sufficient to raise
         tripods, thy fierceness is like thunder and lightning, wherever
         thou dost turn thy face, there is none to stand before thee;
         whenever thou dost attack thou dost surely conquer. This we
         know, that whereas in outward form thou art Our child, in reality
         thou art a God. Truly Heaven, commiserating Our want of
         intelligence and the disturbed condition of the country, has
         ordained that thou shouldst order the Heavenly institution,
         and save the monarchy from extinction. Moreover, this
         Empire is thy Empire, and this Dignity is thy Dignity. I
         adjure thee to exercise profound policy and far-reaching fore-
         sight in searching out iniquity and watching against crises.
         Admonish with majesty; comfort with kindness.                 Avoid
         having recourse to arms, and thou wilt naturally inspire loyal
         obedience. So by cunning words thou mayst moderate the
         violent Deities, and by a display of armed force sweep away
         malignant demons." 1
            Then Yamato-dake no Mikoto received the battle-axe, and,
         bowing twice, addressed the Emperor, saying :-" But few
         years have elapsed since my former expedition to the West,
         when, trusting in the might of the Imperial spirit, I, with a
         sword three feet in lengtl1, conquered the land of Kumaso, and
VII. 23. the rebel chiefs yielded themselves to punishment. N ow again,
         trusting in the spirits! of the Gods of Heaven and Earth, and
         in reliance on the Imperial might, I am proceeding to the
         frontier. I will admonish them by gentle teaching, and if
         any remain unsubmissive, I will smite them with arms." So
         he again bowed twice. Then the Emperor commanded Kibi
         no Take-hiko and Ohotomo no Take-hi no Muraji to follow
         Yanlato-dake no Mikoto. He also appointed Nana-tsuka-hagi
          his steward.

           1 This speech cannot be received as a document of Japanese history.    It
        is a cento of reminiscences of Chinese literature.
           I Numina.

            s Hirata says that Japanese surnames were taken from offices or avoca-
        tions, names of places, parents' names, circumstances, or objects. I suppose
        he would have included under circumstances such personal peCUliarities as
        that which suggested the name Nana-tsuka-hagi, literally'" Seven-span-
        shanks."
                                 KEIKO.                                  2°5
   Winter, loth month, 2nd day. Yamato-dake no Mikoto set
out on his journey.
   7th day. He turned aside from his way to worship at
the shrine of Ise. Here he took leave of Yamato-hime 1 no
Mikoto, saying :-" By order of the Emperor, I am now pro-
ceeding on an expedition against the East to put to death
the rebels, therefore I am taking leave of thee." Hereupon
Yamato-hime no Mikoto took the sword Kusa-nagi and gave it
to Yamato-dake no Mikoto, saying :-" Be cautious, and yet
not remiss."
   This year Yamato-dake no Mikoto first reached Suruga.
The brigands of tllis place made a show of obedience, and said,
deceivingly :-" On this moor there are large deer in very great
plenty. Their breath is like the morning mist, their legs are
like a dense wood. Do thou go and hunt them." Yamato-
dake no Mikoto believed these words, and, going into the
middle of the moor, sought for game. The brigands, desiring
to kill the Prince, set fire to the moor. But the Prince, seeing \T[l. 24.
that he had been d·eceived, produced fire by means of a fire-
drill,2 and, kindling a counter-fire, succeeded in making his
escape.
        One version says :-" The sword Mura-kumo,3 which
      the Prince wore, wielded itself, and mo\ved away the
      herbage near the Prince, thus enabling him to escape.
      Therefore that sword was called Kusa-nagi." 4
   The Prince said :-" I was almost betrayed." So he burnt
all that robber-band and exterminated them. Therefore that
 place was called Yaketsu.!i
   Next he marched on to Sagami, whence he desired to pro-
 ceed to Kadzusa. Looking over the sea, he spake with a loud
 voice, and said :-" This is but a little sea: (\ one might even

   J She was appointed priestess B.C. 5, and \ve are now at A.D. I 10, by the

common chronol'ogy.
   , The interlinear gloss and the" Kojiki " (Ch. K., p. 21 I) have hi-uchi, or
fire·striker, by which a flint and steel is doubtless meant. A fire-drill was
kno\vn to the ancient Japanese, as appears from the" Kojiki "(Ch. K., p. 104)
and other authorities, and it is actually in use at present to produce fire for
sacred purposes. See a paper by Satow, in " J.A.S.T.," VI. 223.
   3 Assembled-clouds.                         4 The herbage mower.

   • Port or ferry of burning.                 6 The bay of Yedo.
           206                              N II-IONGI.
           jump over it." But when he came to the middle of the sea a
           storm suddenly arose, and the Prince's ship was tossed about,
           so that he could not cross over. At this time there was a con-
           cubine in the Prince's suite, named Oto-tachibana-hime. She
           was the daughter of Oshiyama no Sukune of the Hodzumi
           House. She addressed the Prince, saying :-" This present
           uprising of the winds and rushing of the waves, so that the
           Prince's ship is like to sink, must be due to the wishes of the
           God of the Sea. I pray thee let me go into the sea, and so let
           the person of thy mean handmaiden be given to redeem the life
           of the Prince's Augustness." Having finished speaking, she
           plunged into the billows. The storm forthwith ceased, and
           the ship was enabled to reach the shore. Therefore the people
           of that time called that sea Hashiri-midzu.)
VII. 2$-      Hereupon Yamato-dake no Mikoto, going by way of Kad-
           zusa, changed his route, and entered the Land of Michi no
           oku.
             At this time a great Inirror was hung upon the Prince·s ship.
           Proceeding by the sea route, he went round to Ashi no ura
           and crossed aslant to Tama no ura. 2 When he arrived at the
           Yemishi frontier, the chiefs of the Yemishi, Shima-tsu-kami
           and Kuni-tsu-kami,3 encamped at the harbour of Take,
           with the intention of making resistance. But when they
           saw the Prince's ship from afar, they feared his majesty and
           power, and knew in their hearts that they could not gain the
           victory over him. They all flung away their bows and arrows,
           bowed down towards him, and said :-" "'hen we look upon
           thy face, we see that it is more than human. Art thou per-
           chance a Deity? We desire to know thy name." The Prince
           answered and said ::--" I am the son of a Deity of visible
           men." Hereupon the Yemishi were all filled with awe. They
           gathered up their skirts and, plunging into the waves, of their
           own accord assisted the Prince's ship to reach the shore.
           Then, with their hands bound behind them, they submitted
           themselves for punishment. He therefore pardoned their
           offence, and having made prisoners their chieftains, caused
           them to be his personal attendants. The Yemishi having been

                 1    Running-water.                        I In Shimosa.
                 :t   Literally, Gods of the Islands and Gods of the Continent.
                               KEIKO.                                 J26

subdued, he returned from the country of Hitakami, and pro-
ceeding to the south-west, passed through Hitachi, and arrived
at the Land of Kahi, where he dwelt in the palace of Sakawori. VII. 26.
At this time a light was kindled and he partook of food. On
this night he made a song, in which he inquired of those in
attendance on him, saying : -
                    Since I passed Tsukuba~
                    And Nihibari,
                    How many nights have I slept?

  None of his attendants was able to answer him. Now there
was a man who had charge of the lights, who made a song, in
continuation of the Prince's, saying:-
                    Counting the days-
                    Of nights there are nine nights,
                    Of days there are ten days.

  Therefore the Prince commended his intelligence and liberally
rewarded him. l
   Now while he was residing in this palace, he granted to
Take-hi, the ancestor of the Ohotomo no Muraji, the Yuki 2 Be.
Thereupon Yamato-dake no Mikoto said :-" All the wicked
chiefs of the Yemishi have submitted to the punishment of their
crimes. Only in the Land of Shinano and the Land of Koshi
there are a considerable number who are not yet obedient to
the civilizing influence." So from Kahi he turned towards the
north, and passing through Musashi and Kodzuke, he went
westward as far as the Usuhi-saka. 3 Now Yamato-dake no Vlf. .. 27._
Mikoto always thought with regret of Oto-tachibana-hime.
Therefore, when he ascended to the summit of Usuhi and
looked down towards the south-east, he sighed three times, and
said, " Alas! my wife!" Therefore the provinces east of the
                                                f




mountains were given the name of Adzuma. 4
   Here he sent Kibi no Takehiko by a different road to the
Land of Koshi, and caused him to examine the character of the
country as regards means of access, and also whether the people
were tractable or not. So Yamato-dake no Mikoto advanced

     1 Cf. eh. K., p. 21 4.                    S Quiver.

     '. Now kno\\"n as the Usuhi Toge (pass) on the Nakasendo road.
     4 Aga tsunla means my wife.
       208                              NIHONGI.

         into the province of Shinano. This is a Land of high moun-
         tains and profound valleys. Verdant summits are piled up ten
         thousand fold, so that for men with staff in hand they are hard
         to ascend. The cliffs are precipitous, and are girt with flying
         bridges. 1 Many thousand are the hill-ranges, where even with
         slackened reins the horse makes no progress. Yet Yamato-dake
         no Mikoto, bursting through the smoke, and braving the mists,
         distantly crossed ?vIount Oho-yama. He had already reached
         the summit when he became hungry and had food on the moun-
         tain. The God of the mountain plagued the Prince. He
         assumed the form of a white deer and stood before him. The
         Prince, wondering at this, took a stick of garlic, and jerked it
'TIL 28. at the white deer, striking it in the eye and killing it.' Here
         the Prince suddenly lost his way and could find no issue.
         Then a \vhite dog came of its own accord, and made a show of
         guiding the Prince. Following the dog, he proceeded on his
         way, and succeeded in coming out into Mino. Kibi no Take-
         hiko, coming out from Koshi, met him. Before this when any
         one crossed the Shinano pass, he inhaled so much of the breath
         of the Deity that he became ill and lay down. But after the
         white deer was killed, the travellers who crossed that moun-
         tain chewed garlic,s and smearing with it men, kine, and
         horses, preserved them from being affected by the Deity's
         breath.
            Yamato-dake no Mikoto, having returned back again to
         Ohari, straightway took to wife a daughter of the Ohari
         House, by name Miyazu-hime, and tarried there until the next
         month. Here he heard that on Mount Ibuki in Afumi there
         was a savage Deity. So he took off his sword, and leaving it in
         the house of Miyazu-hime, went on afoot. When he arrived at
          Mount Ibuki, the God of the mountain took the shape of a
VII. 29. great serpent, and posted himself on the road.         Hereupon

            1 Kake..hashi, a bridge supported on poles driven into the side of a cliff:

        Common in some mountainous parts of Japan.
           2 Ch. K., 213.

          3 "Another popular device (in Scotland) for frightening away witches and
        fairies was to hang bunches of garlic about the farms." "Auld Licht Idylls,"
        by J. M. Barrie.
           Dennys, in his " Folk-lore of China," mentions several cases of the use
        of garlic or onions to keep a\vay evil spirits.
                               KEIKO.                                    2°9
Yamato-dake no Mikoto, not knowing that it was the master
God who had become a serpent, said to himself :-" This
serpent must be the Savage Deity's messenger. Having already
slain a master God, is a messenger worth hunting after?"
Accordingly he strode over the serpent and passed on. Then
the God of the mountain raised up the clouds, and made an
icy rain to fall. The tops of the hills became covered with mist,
and the valleys involved in gloom. There was no path which
he could follow. He was checked and knew not whither to
turn his steps. However, braving the mist, he forced his way
on\vards, and barely succeeded in finding an issue. He was still
beside himself like a drunken man. He therefore sat down
beside a spring at the foot of the mountain, and, having drunk
of the water, recovered his senses. Therefore that spring was
called the \Vi-same 1 spring.
    It \va'3 at this time that Yamato-dake no Mikoto first became
ill. The disease gradually increased and he returned to Ohari.
Here he did not enter the house of Miyazu-hime, but passed
on to Ise and reached Otsu. 2 Formerly, in the year \vhen
Yamato-date no Mikoto was proceeding eastwards, he halted on
the shore at Otsu and partook of food. At that time he took
off a s\vord which he laid down at the foot of a fir-tree.
Eventually he went away forgetting it. When he now came to
this place, the sword was still there. Therefore he made a
song, sayIng:-
                  Oh ! thou single pine-tree!
                  That art right opposite
                  To Ohari-
                  Ah me-thou single pine-tree!
                  If thou wert a nlan,
                  Garments I would clothe thee with,
                  A sword I ,vould gird on thee.
  \Vhen he came to the moor of Nabo, his sufferings became VII. 30.
very severe. So he made an offering of the Yemishi whom he
had captured to the Shrine of the God.:{ He therefore sent
Kibi no Take-hiko to report to the Emperor, saying :-" Thy
servant having received the command of the Celestial Court,
undertook a distant expedition to the wilds of the East, where
   1  Sit..sober.
   :: Not Otsu on the southern shore of Lake Biwa, but a place in Ise.
   :i As slaves.
        210                           NIl-IONGI.

          by the favour of the Gods, and trusting in the mighty power
          of the Emperor, I made the rebellious to submit themselves for
          punishment, and the violent deities to become moderate.
          Therefore I rolled up my armour, laid aside my weapons, and
          was returning peacefully. It was my hope on such a day at such
          an hour to report my mission to the Celestial Court. 1 Bllt the
          life allotted me by Heaven has unexpectedly approached an
          end. Passing swiftly as a four-horse carriage passes a crack in
          the road, it may not be stayed. Alone I lay me down on the
          waste moor with none to say a word to me. But why should
          I regret the loss of this body? My only grief is that I cannot
          meet thee."
              Having said so, he died on the moor of Nabo. He was then
          thirty years of age. When the Emperor heard it, he could not
          sleep peacefully on his couch, nor was the taste of food sweet
          to him. Night and day his voice was choked with grief: with
          tears and lamentations he beat his breast. Therefore he ex-
          claimed aloud, saying :-" Oh! Our son, Prince Wo-usu!
VII. 3 1• Formerly when the Rumaso revolted he \vas still a boy. But
          for a long time he bore the labour of campaigning. After-
          wards he was constantly at OUf side, supplying Our deficiencies.
          Then when the troubles with the Eastern savages arose, there
          was no one else whom We could send to smite them, so in
          spite of Our affection for him, We sent him into the country of
          the enemy. No day passed that we did not think of him.
          Therefore morning and evening We longingly awaited the da:y
          of his return. Oh! what a calamity! Oh! what a crime! While
          'Ve least expected it, we suddenly lost Our child. Henceforth
          with whom to help us shall we manage the vast institution? "
             So he commanded his ministers and through them
          instructed the functionaries 2 to bury him in the misasagi of
          Nobo Moor in the Land of Ise.
             Now Yamato-dake no Mikoto, taking the shape of a white
          bird, came forth from the misasagi, and .flew towards the Land
          of Yamato. The Ministers accordingly opened the coffin, and
          looking in, saw that only the empty clothing remained, and

         1 This sentence is in the" Shukai " edition introduced at the end of this

       speech.
         2 Lit. the hundred bureaus.
                                  KEIKO.                                  211

that there ,vas no corpse. Thereupon messeng-ers were sent to
follow in search of the white bird. It stopped on the plain of
 Kotobiki in YYamato. Accordingly in that place a misasagi
was erected. The white bird flew on again until it reached
 Kahachi, where it rested in the village of Furuchi, and in this
place also a misasagi 1 was erected. Therefore the men of VII. 32.
that day called these three misasagi " the white bird misasagi." 2
At last it soared aloft to Heaven, and there was nothing buried
but his clothing and official cap. The Emperor, wishing to
perpetuate the fame of his services, established the Takeru:{
Be. This was in the 43rd year of the Emperor's reign.
   SIst year, Spring, Ist month, 7th day. The Emperor A.D. I2I.
summoned his Ministers, and feasted them for several days.
Now the Imperial Prince Waka-tarashi-hiko no Mikoto and
Takechi no Sukune did not come to the Banqueting Court.
The Emperor sent for them and asked the reason. Therefore
they represented to the Emperor, saying :-" On a day of
festival, the Ministers and functionaries must have their minds
bent on jollity, and they do not think of the State. In view of
the possibility of there being madmen, who might watch for
an unprotected space in the ramparts, we remain on guard
beneath the Gate 4 and provide against emergencies." Then
the Emperor spake and said :-" Splendid!" So he showed
them an extraordinary affection.
  Autumn, 8th month, 4th day. Waka-tarashi-hiko no
Mikoto was appointed Prince Imperial. On this day Takechi
no Sukune ,vas appointed Prime Minister.
  The cross-sword Kusanagi, which was at first worn by 'TIl. 33.
Yamato-dake no Mikoto, is now in the shrine of Atsuta in the
district of Ayuchi, in the province of Ohari. Now the Yemishi
who had been presented to the shrine brawled day and night,
and were disrespectful in their goings out and comings in.
Then Yamato-hime no Mikoto said :-" These Yemishi should
not be allowed near the shrine." Accordingly she sent them up

  1 I have seen this tumulus.      It is a very large double mound surrounded
by a moat.
  2 Shira-tori no Misasagi.    Many of the tumuli are favourite resorts of the
w bite egret, \\'hence doubtless the name.
  3 Or Take, brave.                       4 ~1ikado means" august gate."
        212                              NIHONGI.

            to the Court, where they were made to settle beside Mount
            Mimoro. Ere long they cut down all the trees of the sacred
            mountain. They shouted and bawled in the neighbouring
            villages and threatened the people. The Emperor, hearing
            this, summoned his Ministers, and said :-" The Yemishi who
            were placed beside the sacred mountain have by nature the
            hearts of beasts. They cannot be allowed to dwell in the inner
            country." So he caused them to be stationed without the home
            provinces, in any places which they pleased. They ¥rere the
            ancestors of the present Saheki 1 Be of the five provinces of
            Harima, Sanuki, Iyo, Aki, and Aha.
,rII. 34.      In the beginning Yamato-dake no Mikoto took the Imperial
            Princess Futachi-iri-hime, and made her his consort. 2 She
            bore Prince Ineyori-wake, next the Emperor Tarashi-naka-tsu-
            hiko,3 next Nuno oshi-iri-hime no Mikoto, and next Prince
            Waka-take. The eldest of these, Prince Ineyori-wake, was the
            first ancestor of the two families of the Kimi of Inu-gami and
            of the Kimi of Takebe. Another consort, nan1ed Kibi no
            Anato no Take-hime, daughter of Kibi no Take-hiko, bore to
            him Prince Take-miko and Prince Towoki-wake. The elder of
            these, Prince Take -miko, was the first ancestor of the Kimi of
            Aya in Sanuki. Prince Towoki-wake was the first ancestor of
            the Kimi of Wake in lyo. His next consort, Oto-tachibana
            hime, daughter of Oshiyama no Sukune, of the Hodzumi
            House, bore to him Prince Waka-take-hiko.
 VII. 35.      52nd year, Summer, 5th month, 4th day. The Empress
A.D. 122. Harima no Oho-iratsume died.

               Autumn, 7th month, 7th day. Ya-saka-iri-hime no Mikoto
            was appointed Empress.
A.D. 1 2 3.    53rd year, Autumn, 8th month, 1st day. The Emperor
            commanded his Ministers, saying :-" When will Our longing
            for Our son cease ? We desire to make a tour of inspection
            to tIle region subdued by Prince Wo-usu." In this month he


           1 The Chlnese characters for Saheki mean "Assistant-Chief."           It is
         apparently a Chinese word and not Japanese, and therefore it seenlS out of
         place in the history of a period long previous to the introduction of Chinese
         learning. But, ho,vever unhistorical this narrative may be, it goes to prove
         that there is an Aino element in the Japanese nation.
           2 She was his aunt.                          21 Chiuai Tenno.
                                 KEIKO.                                 21 3

mounted into his carriage and made a progress to Ise; where,
turning aside, he entered the East Sea provinces.
   Winter, loth month. He arrived at the province of
Kadzusa, whence by the sea-route he crossed over to the
harhour of Aha.
   At this time the Emperor, hearing the cry of a fish-hawk,
wished to see the bird's form. So he went out upon the sea in
search of it, and caught clams. Hereupon the ancestor of the
Kashihade no Omi, l by name Ihaka Mutsukari, made shoulder-
straps of bulrushes, and preparing a hash of the clams, put it
before the Emperor. Therefore he commended the service
rendered by the Omi Ihaka M utsukari, and granted him the
Stewards' Ohotomo Be.
   12th month. The Emperor returned from the Eastern
country and dwelt in Ise. This was called the Kambata
Palace.
   54th year, Autumn, 9th month, 19th day. From Ise the VII. 36.
                                                                 12
Emperor returned to Yamato, and dwelt in the Palace of A.D. 4.
Makimuku.
   55th year, Spring, 2nd month, 5th day. Prince Hiko-sa- A.D. 12 5,
jima was appointed Governor-general of the fifteen provinces
of the T6-san-do. 2 He was a grandson of Toyoki no Mikoto.
But when he arrived at the village of Anashi in Kasuga
he fell ill and died.
   At this time the people of the Eastern Land, grieved that the
Prince did not arrive, secretly purloined his body, and buried
it in the land of Kodzuke. 3
   56th year, Autumn, 8th month. The Emperor commanded A. D. 126.
Prince Mimoro-wake, saying :-" Thy father, Prince Hiko-
sajima, was unable to proceed to his governorship and died
prematurely. Therefore do thou undertake the absolute rule
of the Eastern Land." So Mimoro-wake no Mikoto, having
received the Emperor's commands, and being also desirous of
accomplishing his father's work, straightway proceeded thither,
and undertook the government. He had already attained to a

  1Stewards.                            2 East-mountain-road.
  3 Several ancient tumuli near the village of Ohoilluro in this province are
perhaps the tombs of this dynasty of governors. They are described in a
paper bySatow, in" T.A.S.].," ""01. VIII., p. 327.
          21 4                             NIHONGI.

            good administration when the Yemishi made a disturbance.
            So he raised an army and attacked them. Then the Yemishi
            chieftains, Ashi-furi-he, Oho-ha-furi-he, and Tohotsu Kura-ho-
            he bowed their heads to the ground and came; they made
            deep obeisance and accepted punishment, offering him all their
            territory without exception. Therefore he pardoned those who
            surrendered, and put to death those who would not submit.
            On this account the Eastern Land was for a long time free
           from trouble. Therefore his descendants are to this day in
           the Eastern Land.
 A.D. 12j.    57th year, Autumn, 9th month. The Pool of Sakate was
 VII. 37· constructed, and the embankment planted with bamboos.
              Winter, loth month. It was commanded that every pro-
           vince should erect granaries of the labourers' Be. l
 AD. 128.     58th year, Spring, 2nd month, 11th day. The Emperor
           made a progress to the Land of Ohomi, and d"velt in Shiga for
           three )7ears. This was called the Palace of Taka-Anaho.
 A.D. 130.    60th year, Winter, 11th month, 7th day. The Emperor
           died in the Palace of Taka-Anaho at the age of 106.




                           THE    E~lPEROR WAKA-TARASHI-HIKO.



                                    (SEIlVIU 2 TENNU.)

             The Emperor Waka-tarashi-hiko was the fourth child of the
          Emperor Oho-tarashi-hiko-oshiro-wake. The name of the
          Empress his mother was Ya-saka-iri-hime no Mikoto, daughter
          of the Imperial Prince Ya-saka-iri-hiko. He was appointed
          Prince Imperial in the 46th year of the Emperor Oho-tarashi-
          hiko, being then aged twenty-four years. In the 60th year of
          his reign, Winter, the 11th month, the Emperor Oho-tarashi-
          hiko died.
A.D. 131.   1st year, Spring, 1st month, 5th day. The Prince Imperial
          assumed the Imperial Dignity. This year was the year Kanoto
          Hitsuji (8th) of the Cycle.
       2
A.D. 13 .   2nd year, Winter, 11th month, loth day. The Emperor

                 I   Cf. eh. K.) p. 205.          Accomplish-functions.
                                   SEI~IU.                                  J26

Oho-tarashi-hiko was buried in the misasagi over the road at
Yamanobe in the province of Yamato.
   The Empress was honoured with the title of Grand Empress. VII. 38.
   3 rd year, Spring, 1St month, 7th day. Takechi no Sukune A.D. 133.
was made Prime Minister. In the beginning the Emperor \vas
born on the same day \vith Takechi no Sukune, and he there-
fore had an extraordinary affection for him.
   4th year, Spring, 2nd month, 1st day. The Emperor com- A.D. 134.
manded, saying :-" OUf predecessor on the throne, the
Emperor Oho-tarashi-hiko, was clear-sighted and of divine
valour. When he became subject to the scheme 1 and received
over the plan he ruled Heaven and was in accordance with
Man. He swept away the banditti, and restored right. His
virtue was like a canopy, his path harmonized with develop-
ment. Therefore in all the land under Universal Heaven
there. was none \vho did not recognize him as Sovereign. VII. 39·
Of all things endowed with life and possessed of soul were there
any which did not find their place?
   We have now succeeded hinl in the occupation of the
precious felicity. Nlorning and night we tremble and fear.
But the people are like \vriggling worms, and will not reform
 the savagery of their hearts. In the provinces and districts
there are no Lords, in the villages there are no Chiefs. 2 Hence-
forward let there be established Lords in the provinces, and
let there be Chiefs placed in the villages. Accordingly let men
of ability of the provinces be taken and appointed Chiefs over
provinces and districts, so as to form a defence for the Inner
 Country." a
   5th year, Autumn, 9th month. A decree was issued to all A.D. 135.
the provinces establishing Miyakko (governors) in the provinces
 and districts, and Inaki 4 in the villages. All were granted

   ~ The 5chelne of the pennutations of the five elements. "Thus \\·ater is
said to overcome fire and 50 forth. Each dynasty is believed to be subject
to the influence of the element \vhich overcomes that prevailing- \vith the
previous dynasty, and all hlunan affairs are referable to the same occult
influence." Mayers' l\Ianual, p. 3 I 7. This \vhole speech is intensely Chinese.
   2 This cannot be correct.                       a i.e. the Gokinai.
   4 Inaki is literally rice-castle, i.e. granary.  The office seems to be SOine.
thing like mayor. It subsequently beC:1nle a nlere title, and eventually a
surname.
                                                                      Q
        216                           NII-IONGI.

          shields and spears as emblems of authority. So the mountain~
          and rivers were made boundaries for the separation of one
          province and district from another, whilst the bounds of town-
          ships and villages were established by means of lanes. In this
          way East and West were reckoned as in a line with the sun,
 VII. 40. while North and South were reckoned as athwart the sun. l
          The sunny side of the mountains was called the light-face
          and the shady side of the mountains the back.face. 2
             In this way the people had tranquil possession of their
          dwellings, and the Empire was at peace.
A.D. 178.   48th year, Spring, 3rd month, 1St day. The Emperor
          appointed his nephew Tarashi-naka-tsu-hiko no Mikoto Prince
          Imperial. s
A.D. 190.   60th year, Summer, 6th month, 11th day. The Emperor
          died, aged r07.

          1 Meaning lanes running N. and S. and lanes running E. and \V.
          2 The modern division of the provinces bet\veen Kioto and Shil1l0noseki,
        the Sanyodo and Sanindo, rests on this distinction.
          3 His own son had perhaps died.
                           BOOK VIII.

            THE EMPEROR TARASHI-NAKATSU-HIKO.


                       (CHIUA/ 1 TENNO.)

THE Emperor      Tarashi-nakatsu-hiko was the second child of
Yamato-dake no Mikoto. The Empress 2 his mother \vas
called Futachi-iri-hime no Mikoto. She was the daughter of the
Emperor Ikume-iri-hiko isachi. The Emperor's countenance
was of perfect beauty, and his stature was ten feet. He ,vas
appointed Prince Imperial in the forty-eighth year of the
Emperor Waka-tarashi-hiko, being at this time thirty.. one
years of age. The Emperor Waka-tarashi-hiko having no male
offspring, appointed him as his successor. In the sixtieth year
of his reign the Emperor died, and in the following year,
Autumn, the 9th month, 6th day, was buried in the Tatanami
misasagi in Saki, in the province of Yamato.
   1st year, Spring, 1st month, 11th day. The Prince Imperial A.D. 192 .
assumed the Imperial Dignity.
  Autumn, 9th month, 1St day. The Empress-mother was
granted the honorary title of Grand Empress.
  Winter, 11th month, 1st day. The Emperor commanded his
Ministers, saying :-" The Prince, Our father, died before "Ve
reached the status of a youth. His divine spirit became changed
into a white bird and ascended to Heaven. Our longing re- VIII. 2.
gard for him knows not a day's intermission. Therefore it is
Our wish to procure white birds and to keep them in the pond :I
within the precincts of the misasagi, so that, looking on these
birds, we may comfort our feelings of longing." Orders were

   1 Chiu means the middle one of three sons; ai, to be sad, to grieve.
   2 She ,vas not Empress.
   I The misasagi are surrounded \vith a moat.
         218                            NIHONGI.

            therefore sent to the various provinces to send tribute df white
            birds.
               Intercalary 11th month, 4th day. The province of Koshi
            sent tribute of four white birds. Now the messengers who were
            sent with the birds stayed for the night on the bank of the
            river Uji. Then Prince Gama-mi-wake, of Ashigami, seeing
            the white birds, made inquiry, saying :-" Whither are you
            taking these white birds?" The men of Koshi answered and
            said :-" The Emperor, out of his longing for the Prince, his
            father, intends to keep them as pets. Therefore do we bring them
            as tribute." Prince Gama-mi-wake spake to the men of Koshi,
            saying :-" These may be white birds, but when they are
            roasted they' will become black birds." So he forcibly seized
           the white birds and carried them away. Hereupon the men of
            Koshi came and reported to the Emperor, who was indignant
           at the affront offered by Prince Gama-mi-wake to the late
           Prince, and sending troops, put him to death.
               Prince Gama-mi-Wake was the younger brother of the
           Emperor by a different mother. The people of that time said:
           - " A father is Heaven, an elder brother is a Lord; how can he
           escape execution who is wanting in respect to Heaven, and who
           thwarts his Lord? " 1
              This year was the year Midzunoye Saru (9th) of the Cycle.
A.D. 193.     2nd year, Spring, 1st month, 11th day. Oki-naga-tarashi-
           hime \\'as appointed Empress. Before this the Emperor had
           taken to him as consort Oho-nakatsu-hime, daughter of his
           uncle Hiko-bito Ohine. She bore to him the Imperial Prince
 '~III. 3. Kakosaka and the Imperial Prince Oshikuma.          Next he took
           to him as consort Oto-hime, daughter of Oho-saka-nushi,2 the
           ancestor of the Miyakko of Kukumada. She bore to him the
           Imperial Prince Homuya wake.
              2nd month, 6th day. The Emperor made a progress
           to Tsunoga,a where he erected a temporary palace and dwelt
           in it. This was called the Palace of Kehi. In the same month
           the granary of Ahaji was established.
              3rd month, 15th day. The Emperor made a tour of inspec..

          1  These phrases are Chinese, and therefore an anachronisln in a history of
        this period.
             Great-sake-master.                      3 Tsuruga.
                               CHIUAI.                               21 9

tion to the Southern prOVInces. Hereupon he left behind the
Empress and the functionaries, and with two or three High
officials 1 and sev.eral hundred officers in attendance, he pro-
ceeded, thus lightly equipped, as far as the land of Kil, \vhere
he dwelt in the Palace of Tokorotsu. At this time the Kumaso
rebelled and did not bring tribute. The Emperor thereupon
prepared to smite the Land of Rumaso, and starting from
Tokorotsu, borne over the sea, he made a progress to Anato. On
the same day he sent messengers to Tsunoga and commanded
the Empress, saying :-" Set out straightway from that harbour
and meet me at Anato."
   SUffilner, 6th month, loth day. The Emperor anchored
in the harbour of Toyora, while the Etnpress, who had
set out from Tsunoga on her way there, arrived at the
Strait of Nuta, and partook of food on board her ship. A
great many tahi assembled beside the ship. The Empress
 sprinkled sake upon the tahi, which forthwith became drunk VIIr. 4.
 and floated to the surface. Then the fishermen, having
caught numbers of these tahi, were delighted, and said:-
 "They are the fish given us by our wise sovereign." There-
 fore the fish of that place, when the sixth month comes, are in
 the habit of floating belly upwards as if they were drunk. This
 was the origin of it.
   Autumn, 7th month, 5th day. The Empress anchored in the
 harbour of Toyora. On this day the Empress found in the
 sea a Nyoi 2 pearl.
   9th month. The Emperor erected a Palace in Anato, and
 dwelt in it. It was called the Palace of Toyora in Anato.
    8th year, Spring, 1St month, 4th day. The Emperor pro-
 ceeded to Tsukushi. At this time Kuma-wani,3 the ancestor
 of the Agata-nushi of Oka, hearing of the Emperor's arrival,
 pulled up beforehand a soo-branched Sakaki tree, which he set

  1  Daibu.
  2  The Nyoi (in  i)    is a sort of sceptre seen in the hands of Buddhist
idols. It contains the Mani, one of the Sapta ratna, a fabulous pearl which
is ever bright and IUlninous, and therefore a symbol of Buddha and of his
doctrines.
   A Buddhist term is of course an anachronism in this narrative.
   3 Bear (i.e. enormous), sea-monster, a fit name for a personage of a

legendary narrative. See p. 6 I, note 3.
       220                            NIHONGI.

         up on the bows of a nine-fathom ship. On the upper branches
         he hung a white-copper mirror, on the middle branches he hung
         a ten-span sword, and on the lower branches he hung Yasaka
         jewels. With these he went out to meet him at the Bay of
VIII. 5. Saha in Suwa, and presented to him a fish-salt-place. l In doing
         so, he addressed the Emperor, saying :-" Let the Great Ferry
         fronl Anato to Mukatsuno be its Eastern Gate and the Great
         Ferry of Nagoya 2 be its Western Gate. Let the Islands of
         Motori and Abe and none else be the august baskets: let the
         Island of Shiba be divided and made the august pans: let the Sea
         of Sakami be the salt-place." He then acted as the Emperor's
          pilot. Going round Cape Yamaga, he entered the Bay of Oka.
              But in entering the harbour, the ship was unable to go
         forward. So he inquired of Kuma-wani, saying :-" We have
         heard that thou, Kuma-wani, hast come to us with an honest
         heart. Why does the ship not proceed?" Kuma-wani addressed
         the Emperor, saying :-" It is not the fault of thy servant that
          the august ship is unable to advance. At the entrance to this
          bay there are two Deities, one male and the other female.
          The male Deity is called Oho-kura-nushi,s the female Deity is
          called Tsubura-hime. It must be owing to the wish of these
          Deities." The Emperor accordingly prayed to them, and
          caused them to be sacrificed to, appointing his steersman
          Iga-hiko, a man of Uda in the province of Yamato, as priest."
          So the ship was enabled to proceed. The Empress entered in
          a different ship by the Sea of Kuki. As the tide was out, she
VIII. 6. was unable to go on. Then Kuma-wani went back and met
          the Empress by way of Kuki. Thereupon he saw that the
          august ship made no progress, and he was afraid. He hastily
          made a fish-pond and a bird-pond, into which he collected all
          the fishes and birds. When the Empress saw these fishes and
           birds sporting, her anger was gradually appeased, and with the
           flowin.g tide she straightway anchored in the harbour of Oka.


          J  A salt-pan.
          2  Near Karatsu. It ,vas from Nagoya that Hideyoshi's expedition sailed
        for Corea. By the salt-place is evidently nleant the whole northern coast of
        Kiushiu. Salt is still made here, though the chief seat of this manufacture
        is now the shores of the Inland Sea. See Wilenlan in "T.A S.J." XVII. I.
           I Great-magazine..lord.                   4 Hafuri.
                                   CHIUAI.                               221

   Moreover, Itote, the ancestor of the Agata-nushi of Ito' in
Tsukushi, hearing of the Emperor's coming, pulled up sakaki
trees of 500 branches, which he set up in the bo\v and stern of
his ship. On the upper branches he hung Yasaka jewels, on
the middle branches white-copper mirrors, and on the lower
branches ten-span swords, and coming to meet the Emperor at
 Hikejima in Anato, presented them to him. In doing so, he
addressed the Emperor, saying :-" As to these things ,vhich
thy servant dares to offer, mayst thou govern the universe with
subtlety tortuous as the curvings of the Yasaka jewels ; ~ may
thy glance survey mountain, stream and sea-plain bright as
the mirror of white copper; mayst thou, wielding this ten-span
s\vord, maintain peace in the Empire." Thereupon the
 Emperor commended Itote, and called him Isoshi. \\There-
fore the men of that time called the native place of Itote the
 Land of Iso. The present name I to is a corruption of this.
   22nd day. The Emperor arrived in the district of Naka. VIII. j.
 Here he dwelt in the palace of Kashihi.
   Autumn, 9th Illonth, 5th day. The Emperor addressed his
 Ministers, and consulted with them as to attacking the Kumaso.
 At this time a certain God inspired the Errlpress and instructed
 her, saying :-" \Vhy should the Emperor be troubled because
 the Kumaso do not yield submission? It is a land \vanting in
backbone.      Is it \vorth while raising an army to attack it?
There is a better land than this, a land of treasure, which may
be compared to the aspect of a beautiful woman-the land of
Mukatsu':~ dazzling to the eyes.   In that land there are gold
and silver and bright colours in plenty. It is called the Land
of Silla of the coverlets of paper-mulberry." If thou worship-
pest me aright, that land will assuredly yield submission freely,
and the edge of thy sword shall not at all be stained with blood.

  1 This place is mentioned by a Chinese traveller to Japan in the third

century of our era. "There are" (he says) "hereditary kings in Ito, ,vho
all o\ve allegiance to the Queen country."
  2 ~o doubt Maga-tama are meant.                      ~ Opposite.
   .. Taku-fusuma in Japanese This is a pillo\\7-\\,ord, prefixed to Silla, not
                               6




in the least because coverlets of cloth \voven from the inner bark of the
paper-Illuiberry ,vere in use in that country, but because Silla (in Japanese
Shiraki) suggests Shira, ,,,bite, and textiles of paper-nlulberry were white.
By" bright colours~; is probably Incant dyed textile goods.
        222                            NIHONGI.

         Afterwards the Kumaso will surrender. In worshipping me,
         let these things be given as offerings, namely, the Emperor's
         august ship and the water-fields 1 called Ohota,2 presented to
         him by'Homutachi, the Atahe of Anato." \Vhen the Emperor
         heard the words of the God, his mind was filled \vith doubt,
         and straightway ascending a high hill, he looked a\vay into the
         distance. But far and wide there was the ocean, and he sa\\i
         no land. Hereupon the Emperor answered the God, and
         said :-" We have looked all around, and there is sea, and no
         land. Can there be a country in the Great Void? 3 Who is
         the God who cheats Us with vain illusions? 11oreover, all
         the Emperors Our ancestors have worshipped the Gods of
         Heaven and Earth without exception, and none has been
         omitted." Then the God again spake by the mouth of the
         Empress, saying :-" I see this country lie outstretched like a
         reflection from Heaven in the water. Why sayest thou that
VIII. 8. there is no country, and dost disparage my words? But as
         thou, 0 King! hast spoken thus, and hast utterly refused to
         believe me, thou shalt not possess this land. The child with
         which the Empress has just become pregnant, he shall
         obtain it."
            The Emperor, however, was still incredulous, and persisted
         in attacking the Rumaso. But he retreated without having
         gained a victory.
A.D.2CC.    9th year, Spring, 2nd month, 5th day. The Emperor took
         suddenly ill, and died on the following day, at the age of 52.
                 One version says :-" The Emperor having gone in
              person to smite the Kumaso, was hit by an enemy's arrow,
              and slain."
            Thereupon the Empress and the Prime Minister Takechi no
         Sukune suppressed the mourning for the Emperor, and did not
         aliow it to be known to the Empire.
            Accordingly the Empress commanded the Prime Minister,
         the Nakatomi 4 Ikatsu no Muraji, Oho-miwa no Ohotomo-

          1 i.e., rice lands.                          ~ Great fields.
          B The sky. Corea is visible from the Japanese island of Tsushima, and
        must have been well kno\vn to the Japanese at this time. There has already
        been frequent mention of it in the" Nihongi " itself.
          4 Probably here used in its original signification of Middle Minister.
                                CHIUAI.                                  "..,
                                                                       2 -,,')

nushi no Kimi, Mononobe no Ikuhi no Muraji, and Ohotomo
no Takemotsu no MuraJ"i, saying :-" The Empire is still \7111 • 9"
ignorant of the Emperor's decease. If the people were to
know of it, there would be negligence." So she instructed the
four high officials to cause the functionaries to keep watch
within the Palace while the body of the Emperor ,vas secretly
taken up and entrusted to Takechi no Sukune. He removed
it by sea to Anato, and buried it temporarily in the Palace
of Toyora, giving it a fireless temporary burial.!
   22nd day. The Pritne Minister, Takechi no Sukune, re-
turned from Anato, and made his report to the Empress. This
year, owing to the expedition against Silla, it was impossible
to bury the Emperor. 2

  1 The commentators say that for the sake of secrecy there \\'ere no lights

used.
  2 An army of labourers was needed to build one of the enormous tumuli

which \vere the fashion at this ti lne.
                                     BOOK IX.

                       OKINAGA-TARASHI-HIME NO             ~IIKOTO.



                                 (JILVGOI KOGU.)

      OKINAGA-T~RASHI-HIME NO MIKOTO was        the great-grandchild
      of the Emperor \Vaka-Yamato-neko-hiko Ohohihi'Z and the
      daughter of Prince Okinaga 8 no Sukune. Her mother's name
      ,vas Katsuraki no Taka-nuka-hime. She was made Empress
      in the second year of the Elnperor N aka-tsu-hiko. Whilst
      still young, she ,vas intelligent and shrewd, and her counte-
      nance was of such blooming beauty that the Prince her father
      wondered at it.
         In his 9th year, Spring, the 2nd month, the Emperor
      Naka-tsu-hiko died in the palace of Kashihi in Tsukushi. At
      this time the Empress was grieved that the Emperor would
      not follow the Divine instructions, and had consequently died
lX.2. a premature death.    She thought she would find out what God
      had sent the curse, so that she might possess herself of the
      land of treasures. She therefore commanded her Ministers
      and functionaries to purge offences 4 and to rectify transgres-

        .l Divine luerit or success.                   2 Kaik\va Tenno.

        3  Natne of a place in Ohomi. This is hardly consistent with the state·
     ment at the end of this reign that Oki-naga (long life) was a posthumous
     nanle given her, apparently o\ving to the great age to \vhich she attained.
        ol The ceremony of purification (harahi) is referred to.

        Motowori observes on the parallel passage of the" Kojiki "that tsull1i,
     offence, includes kegare, pollutions, ashiki waza, ill-deeds, and wazawahi,
     calanlities. The offences for \vhich the cereluony of purification \\-as required
     are enumerated in the" Kojiki " as flaying alive, flaying backwards, breaking
     down the divisions between rice-fields, filling up irrigating channels, com-
     nlitting nuisances, incest, and bestiality. The Oho-harahi, or Great Purifica-
     tion Ritual, gives a similar but 1110re detailed description. See Ch. K.,
      P·23°·
                                     JINGO.                                    J26

sians, also to construct a Palace of ,,"orship 1 in the village of
\Vayamada.
   3rd month, 1St day. The Empress, having selected a lucky
day,2 entered the Palace of worship, and discharged in person the
office of priest. 3 She commanded Takechi no Sukune to play
on the lute/ and the N akatomi, Igatsu no Omi, ,vas designated
as Saniha. 5 Then placing one thousand pieces of cloth, high
pieces of cloth, on the top and bottom of the lute, she prayed
saying :-" \\Tho is the God \vho on a former day instructed the
Emperor? I pray that I may kno\v his name." After seven
days and seven nights there came an ans\ver, saying :-" I am
the Deity \\1ho dwells in the Shrine of split-bell Isuzu in the
district of hundred-transmit Watarahi in the pro'9ince of divine-
\vind Ise,6 and my name is Tsuki-sakaki idzu no mi-tama ama-
zakaru Muka-tsll hime'; no 1\1ikoto.
   Again she inquired :-" Other than this Deity, are there any IX. 3·
Deities present?" The ans\ver vvas :-" I am the Deity who
comes forth on the ears of the flag-like Eulalia,8 and my d\vell-
ing is in the district of Aha in Ada-fushi in Oda."           She
inquired :-." Are there others?"         There ,vas an ans\ver,
saying :-" There is the Deity who rules in Heaven, \vho rules
in the Void, the gem-casket-entering-prince, the a\vful I{oto-
shiro-nushi." 9

   1 Lit. religious abstinence.      See above, p. 176.
   :: "Lucky day" is probably a Chinese trait.                3 I~annt1shi.

   4 The Japanese or Adzuma koto, described as an instrtunent five or SIX

feet long, with six strings.
    5 Saniha is explained as the official ,vho exanlines the utterances prompted

by the Deity. The literal lneaning is "pure court," from the place in \vhich
he stood during the ceremony. See Ch. K., p. 229.
    8 The epithets split-bell, hundred-transmit and divine-,vind are nlakura-
kotoba or pillo\v-\vords, which have no Ineaning to us. Split-bell is put
 before Isuzu because suzu lneans bell (Fr. grelot). Wataru," to cross over,"
 suggests the phrase mOlno-tsutahe (hundred-transmit). See Ch. K., p. 247.
    'i The a\vful spirit of the planted Cleyera, the lady of sky-distant 1\1 ukatsu.
 Mukatsu, as appears froln p. 221, is Corea. The Deity,vho d\vells at Ise
 is the Sun-Goddess. But she chooses (apparently) to represent herself as a
 Corean Deity. Sakaki (Cleyera ]aponica) is the sacred tree of Shinto.
     S A tall grass, like pampas grass, hence the epithet flag-like.

     9 Koto-shiro-nushi, thing-know-master.      Thing-kno\v is a Chinese idiolTI for
 " to rule':' and it is the san1e \\'ord which is rendered rule just above.
     226                            NIHONGI.

         She inquired :-" Are there others? "         There was an
      answer, saying :-" It is not known whether there are others or
      not." Hereupon the Saniha 1 said :-" There is no answer
      now, but they will speak again afterwards." So there was an
      answer, saying :-" There are the Gods who have settled to the
      bottom of the water of the Little Strait of Tachibana 2 in the
      Land of Hiuga, and who are produced and dwell there like
      fresh water plants. Their names are Uha-tsutsu no wo, Naka-
      tsutsu no wo, and Soko-tsutsu no wo. s
         She inquired :-" Are there others?" There was an answer,
      saying :-" Whether there are or not is unknown." And
      nothing more was ever said as to the existence of other Gods.
         Now that the Divine words 4 had been obtained, the Gods
      were worshipped in accordance with their instructions. There-
      after, Kamo no Wake, the ancestor of the Kibi no Omi, was
      sent to attack the Kumaso. Before many days had elapsed
      they freely sublnitted.
IX 4.    Moreover, there was in the village of Notorita a man
      named Hashiro Kuma-washi. 5 He was a fellow of powerful
      frame, and had wings on his body, so that he could fly, and
      with them soar aloft. Therefore he would not obey the
      Imperial commands, but habitually plundered the people.
         17th day. The Empress desired to attack Kuma-washi. So
      from the Palace of Kashihi she returned to the Palace of
      Matsunowo. At this time a whirlwind suddenly arose, and
      her august hat was blown off by the wind. Therefore the men
      of the time called that place Mikasa. 6
         20th day. She arrived at the Moor of Sosoki, where she
      took up arms and smote Hashiro Kuma-washi, and destroyed
       him. Then she addressed her courtiers, saying :-" My mind
      is at peace now that we have taken Kuma-washi." Therefore
      the name of that place was called Yasu. 7
         25th day. Going on from thence, she arrived at the district
       of Yamato,8 where she put to death a Tsuchi-g-umo named
        1  See above, p. 225.
       2   Little Strait is in the original Wodo: the Bungo Channel.
        :i See Ch. K., p. 41, also above, p. 27.

        4 The term" divine words" probably means the proper names and titles

      of the Deities.
        b Feather-white bear-eagle.            6 August hat.       7 Peaceful.
        3   In Chikugo.
                               JINGO.                                 J26

Tabura-tsu-hime.      Now Tabura-tsu-hime's elder brother
Natsuha had raised an army and advanced against the Empress,
but on hearing that his younger sister had been already put to
death, he took to flight.
   Summer, 4th month, 3rd day. Proceeding northwards,
she arrived at the district of Matsura in the Land of Hizen, and
partook of food on the bank of the river Wogawa,l in the
village of Tamashima. Here the Empress bent a needle and
made of it a hook. She took grains of rice and used them as
bait. Pulling out the threads of her garment, she made of
them a line. Then mounting upon a stone in the middle of the
river, and casting the hook, she prayed, saying :-" We are IX. 5.
proceeding westward, \vhere we desire to gain possession of the
Land of Treasure. If we are to succeed, let the fish of the
river bite the hook." Accordingly, raising up her fishing-rod,
she caught a trout. Then the Empress said :-" It is a strange
thing." Wherefore the men of the day called that place the Land
of Medzura. The present name Matsura ~ is a corruption of this.
For this reason, \vhenever the 1st decade of the 4th month
comes round, the women of that land take hooks, which they
cast into the river and catch trout-a custom which has not
ceased unto this day. The men may angle for fish, but they
cannot catch any.
  This having been done, the Empress knew that there \vas
virtue in the teaching of the Gods, and she made sacrifice ane\v
to the Gods of Heaven and Earth. As it was her purpose in
person to chastise the West, she set apart a sacred rice-field,
and tilled it. Then, in order to divert water from the Naka-
gaha with which to irrigate it, she dug a channel as far as the
Hill of Todoroki. But a great rock stood in the way, and she
was unable to pierce a channel through it. Then the Empress
sent for Takechi no Sukune, and offering a sword and a mirror
made him pray to the Gods of Heaven and Earth, and ask them
to allo\v the channel to be completed. Straightway there came
thunder and lightning, and stamped that rock asunder, so that
the water passed through. Therefore the men of the time
called that channel the Channel of Sakuta.:~
  1 Little river.
  2 Medzurashiki means" strange."   Matsura is reaDy Matsu-ura, fir-bay.
  3 Sundered field.
      228                              NIHONGI.

          The Empress returned to the Bay of Kashihi, and loosing
       her hair, looked over the sea, saying :-" I, having received the
       instructions of the Gods of Heaven and Earth, and trusting in
       the Spirits of the Imperial ancestors, floating across the deep
       blue sea, intend in person to chastise the West. Therefore do
IX. 6. I now lave my head in the water of the sea. If I am to be
       successful, let my hair part spontaneously into two." Accord-
       ingly she entered the sea and bathed, and her hair parted of its
       own accord. The Empress bound it up parted into bunches!
          Then she addressed her ministers, saying :-" To make war
       and move troops is a matter of the greatest concern to a country.
       Peace and danger, success and failure must depend on it. If I
       now entrusted to you, my ministers, the duties of the expedition
       we are about to undertake, the blame, in case of ill-success,
       would rest with you. This would be very grievous to me.
       Therefore, although I am a woman, and a feeble woman too,
       I will for a while borrow the outward appearance of a man, and
       force myself to adopt manly counsels. Above, I shall receive
       support from the Spirits of the Gods of Heaven and Earth,
       while below I shall avail myself of the assistance of you, my
       ministers. Brandishing our weapons, we shall cross the towering
        billows: preparing an array of ships, we shall take possession of
       the Land of Treasure. If the enterprise succeeds, all of you,
        my ministers, will have the credit, while if it is unsuccessful, I
        alone shall be to blame. Such have been my intentions, do ye
        deliberate together regarding them." The ministers all said : -
        " The object of the meaSllre which the Empress has devised for
        the Empire is to tranquillize the ancestral shrines and the Gods
        of the Earth and Grain, and also to protect her servants from
        blame. With heads bowed to the ground we receive thy
        commands." 2
           Autumn, 9th month, loth day. The various provinces were
        ordered to collect ships and to practise the use of weapons.
        But an army could not be assembled. The Empress said : -
        " This is surely the will of a God." So she erected the Shrine
        of Oho-miwa, and offered there a sword and a spear. Then the
        troops assembled freely. Hereupon a fisherman of Ahe, by

                    1   In nlanly fashion.
                   2 This speech is copied from a Chinese book.
                                JINGO.                                 229

name \Vomaro, \vas sent Qut into the \Vestern Sea, to spy if IX. 7.
there \vas any land there. He came back and said :-" There
is no land to be seen." Again a fisherman of Shika, named
Nagusa, ,vas sent to look. After several days he returned, and
said :-" To the north-west, there is a mountain girt "rith
clouds and extending crosswise. This is perhaps a country."
Hereupon a lucky day was fixed upon by divination. There
,vas yet an interval before they should set out. Then the
Empress in person, grasping her battle-axe, commanded the
three divisions of her army, saying :-" If the drums are
beaten out of time, and the signal-flags are waved confusedly,
order cannot be preserved among the troops: if greedy of
wealth, and eager for much, you cherish self and have regard
for ~your o\vn interests, you will surely be taken prisoners
by the enemy. Despise not the enemy, though his numbers
 may be fe,v; shrink not from him, though his numbers may be
many'. Spare not the violent, slay not the submissive. There
lvill surely be rewards for those who ultimately conquer in
 battle, and of course punishments for those who turn their
 backs and flee."
   After this a God gave instructions, saying :-" A gentle spirit
 will attach itself to the Empress's person, and keep watch
 over her life: a rough spirit will form the vanguard, and be a
 guide to the squadron." So when she had received the divine IX. 8.
 instructions she did worship, and for this purpose appointed
 Otarimi/ Yosami no Ahiko to be the Director of the ceremonies
 in honour of the God.
   The time had now come for the Empress's delivery. So she
 took a stone which she inserted in her loins, and prayed, say-
 ing :-" Let my delivery be in this land on the day that I
 return after our enterprise is at an end." That stone is now
 on the road-side in the district of Ito. 2
    After this the rough spirit was told to act as vanguard of the
 forces, and the gentle spirit requested to act as guardian of the
 Royal vessel.

  I Otarilni is the na, or personal name; Yosami the uji, or name of the

House; Ahiko is the Kabane, or title.
  2 Tradition pointed out two \\"hite egg-shaped stones a little over a foot
long as those used on this occasion. They ,vere afterwards stolen.
       23°                        NIHONGI.

           Winter, loth month, 3rd day. Sail was set from the har-
        bour of Wani. l Then the Wind-God made a breeze to spring
        up, and the Sea-God 2 uplifted the billows. The great fishes of
        the ocean, everyone, came to the surface and encompassed the
 IX. 9. ships. Presently a great wind blew from a favourable quarter
        on the ships under sail, and following the waves, without the
         labour of the oar or helm, they arrived at Silla. The tide-wave
         following the ships reached far up into the interior of the
         country. Hereupon the King of Silla feared and trembled,
         and knew not what to do, so he assembled all his people and
         said to them :-" Since the State of Silla was founded, it has
         never yet been heard that the water of the sea has encroached
         upon the land. Is it possible that the term of existence granted
        to it by Heaven has expired, and that our country is to become
        a part of the ocean? " Scarce had he spoken when a warlike
        fleet overspread the sea. Their banners were resplendent in
        the sunlight. The drums and fifes raised up their voices, and the
        mountains and rivers all thrilled to the sound. The King of
        Silla beholding this from afar felt that his country was about
        to be destroyed by this extraordinary force, and was terrified
        out of his senses. But presently coming to himself, he said : -
        " I have heard that in the East there is a divine country named
        Nippon, and also that there is there a wise sovereign called the
        Tenno. This divine force must belong to that country. How
IX. 10. could we resist them by force of arms? " So he took a white
        flag, and of his own accord rendered submission, tying his
        hands behind his back with a white rope. He sealed up the
        maps and registers, and going down before the Royal vessel
        bowed his head to the ground, and said :-" Henceforward, as
        long as Heaven and Earth endure, we will obediently act as
        thy forage-providers. Not allowing the helms of our ships to
        become dry, every spring and every autumn we will send
        tribute of horse-combs and whips. And, \vithout thinking the
        sea-distance a trouble, we will pay annual dues of male and
        female slaves." He confirmed this by repeated oaths, saying:-
        " When the sun no longer rises in the East, but comes forth

        1 In Tsushima.
        2 The words used here for Wind-God and Sea-God are purely Chinese.
      " }Eolus" and" Neptune ,vould be just as appropriate in a Saga.
                            J)
                                    JINGO.                                   23 1
in the West; when the River Arinare 1 turns its course back-
ward, and when the river pebbles ascend and become stars-
if before this we fail to pay" homage every spring and every
autumn, or neglect to send tribute of combs and whips, may
the Gods of Heaven and Earth both together punish us."
   Then someone said :-" Let us put to death the King of
Silla." Hereupon the Empress said :-" When I first received
the Divine instructions, promising to besto\v on me the Land
of Gold and Silver, I gave orders to the three divisions of the
army, saying :-' Slay not the submissive.? Now that we have
taken the Land of Treasure, and its people have freel}~ offered
submission, it would be unlucky to slay them." So she loosed
the cords with which he was bound, and made him her forage-
provider.
   Ultimately she proceeded to the interior of that country,
placed seals on the magazines of precious treasure, and took
possession of the books of maps and registers.~ The spear on
which the Empress leant 3 was planted at the gate of the King
of Silla as a memorial to after ages. Therefore that spear
even now remains planted at the King of Silla's gate.
   Now Phasa l\tlikeun,· King of Silla, gave as a hostage Mi-
cheul-kwi-chi Pha-chin Kan-ki/ and \vith gold and silver,
bright colours, figured gauzes and silks, he loaded eighty vessels,
which he made to follo\v after the Imperial forces. This was
the origin of the King of Silla always sending eighty ships of
tribute.
   Hereupon the kings of the two countries of Koryo and Pekche 6

  1   Supposed to be the Am-nok-kang.
  ~ The Cadastral records.                              3 As a staff.

  4  The traditional kana rendering is Hasa Mukin. Phasa was the 6th King
of Silla. He reigned frolll A.D. 80 to A.D. I 12. l\likeun or ~lukin is not
clear. The last syllable corresponds with the last syllable of ni-sit-keun
(J.t ffiJi ~), an old Silla \\'ord for king, 111entioned in the Introduction to
the " Tongkaln."
   i The traditional kana has Mi-shi-ko-chi Ha-tori Kanlu-ki.           Pha-chin
,vas the fourth official rank in Silla (see ,. Tongkan1," 1.31), and Kanki i~ said
by the Shiki to be a title. A Silla Prince named 1\1 isaheun (in Japanese
Mishikin) ,vas sent as hostage to Japan A.D. 402. I t is clear from what
fo11o\vs (.\.D. 205) that this IS the saine person.
   6 The original name of this country is Kokuryo.            It did not become
officially kno\\'n as Koryo until A.D. 936, but the contracted {arm was in use
                                                                       R
      23 2                             NII:IONGI.

IX. 12. hearing that Silla had rendered up its maps and registers,! and
      made submission, secretly caused the warlike power (of the
      Empress) to be spied out. Finding then that they could not
      be victorious, they came of themselves without the camp, and
      bowing their heads to the ground, and sighing, said :-" Hence-
      forth for ever, these lands shall be styled thy western frontier
      provinces, and will not cease to offer tribute." Accordingly
      interior Governments \,'"ere instituted. This is what is termed
      the three Han. 2
         The Empress returned from Silla.
         12th month, 14th day. She gave birth to the Emperor
      Homuda in Tsukushi. Therefore the men of that time called
      the place where he \vas born U mi. 3

      long before, and there are examples of it in Chinese literature as early as
      A.D. 500 (Parker, U Race Struggles in Corea," "T.A.S.].," XVIII., Pt. 11.).
      The capital ,vas Phyongyang, at least at one time.
        The Japanese nalue for this kingdonl ,vas Koma, a ,vord of doubtful
      derivation. 1 think it possible that it means bear (in Corean kom), and that
      the KOlua of Corea and the Kuma of Japan ,,·ere the same race-like the
      Saxons of Germany and the Saxons of England. Parker, in the article just
      referred to (p. 2 16), suggests that KOlua ",-as really a part of Pekche, and
      not I(oryu. The to,vn of Koma or Kuma was certainly in Pekche territory,
      and ,vas for a while the capital. But I cannot think that the Japanese could
      have been mistaken on this point. They were far too ,vell acquainted with
      Corcan luatters, and \vith thenl Koryo and Koma are the same thing. It is
      probable nevertheless that Koma or Kumanari was at some time the seat of
      the race of that name, as KUlnamoto in Japan was of the Japanese Kuma.
      It is no\v Ung-chhon (bear-riyer), near the Inouth of the R. Nak-tong, and
      a convenient port for crossing over to Japan.
         Pekche, known to the Japanese as Kudara, v;as "he S.-W. kingdom of
      Corea.
         1 i.e. the territory described in them.

         t Corea at one tinle \vas divided into three kingdoms, called ~Ia-han, Sin-
      han, and Pyon-han, corresponding respectively to Pekche, Silla, and Koryu.
       But there is some doubt on the subject.
          The three Han are rendered in the kana gloss mitsu no Kara-kuni. But
      although Kara is sometimes used loosely for all Corea, and even to include
       China, I doubt much \vhether there ever was such a phrase as the three
       Karas. It looks like a mere literal translation of Samhan.
          For an estimate of the historical value of this narrative of the conquest of
       Corea, I would refer the reader to my paper on Early Japanese History in
      the" T.A.S.].," XVI. Pt. I.
         a Birth.
                           JINGO.                   J26

   One version says :-" When the Emperor Tarashi.. IX. 13.
nakatsu-hiko dwelt in the palace of Kashihi in Tsukushi,
there were Deities who spake by the rnouth of Uchi-saru-
taka, Kuni-saru-taka, and ~fatsu-ya-tane, ancestors of the
Agata-nushi of Saha, and admonished the Emperor,
saying :-' If the august descendant wishes to gain the
Land of Treasure, we will presently bestow it on him.' So
on a later day, a lute was brought and given to the
Empress. And the Empress played upon the lute, in
accordance with the word of the Gods. Hereupon the
Gods spake by the mouth of the Empress, and admonished
the Emperor, saying :-' The land which the august
descendant wishes for is, as it were, a stag's horn, and
not a real country. But if the august descendant no\v
makes due offering to us of the ship in which he sails, and
of the water-field 1 called Ohota given him as tribute by
 Homutate, the Atahe of Anato, we will bestow on the
august descendant a dazzling land, a land of plenteous
treasures, fair to look upon as a beautiful woman.' Then
 the Emperor answered the Gods, saying :-' Gods though
ye may be, why these deceiving words? \Vhere is there
any country? Moreover, when the ship in which We sail
 has been offered to you Deities, in ,vhat ship shall \Ve
 sail? N or do I kno\v what Gods ye are. I pray you, let
 me know your names.' Then the Gods gave their names,
 saying :-' Uha-tsutsu no 'VO, Naka-tsutsu no wo, Soko-
 tsutsu no wo.' Such were the names of the three Gods
 given by them. And again one said :-' I am Mukahitsu
 no we, Kiki-so-ofu-itsuno mitama, Hayasa-nobori no
 Mikoto.' Then the Emperor spake to the Empress, and
 said :-' What ill-sounding things they say!       Is it a
 woman? What is n1eant by Hayasa-nobori ?' 2 Then the
 Gods addressed the Emperor, saying :-' 0 King, since IX. 14.
 thou art thus unbelieving, thou shalt not possess that
 country. But the child which is now in the Empress's
 womb, he will doubtless take possession of it.' On that
 night the Emperor took suddenly ill, and died. Afterwards
 the Empress performed worship in accordance with the

         1   Rice-field.            Speed-ascend.
234                                 NIHONGI.

       directions of the Gods. 1 Then the Empress, clad in male
       attire, went on the expedition against Silla, and the Gods
       guided her. Accordingly the wave which followed the
       ship reached far into the interior of the Land of Silla.
       Hereupon the Silla Prince U rusohorichiu 2 came to meet
       the Empress, and kneeling down, took hold of the Royal
       vessel. Bowing his head to the ground, he said :-' Hence-
       forward thy servant will act as an interior Government for
       the child of the Gods who dwells in Japan, and will not
       cease to furnish tribute.' "
          One version says :-" She took prisoner the Prince of
       Silla, and going to the sea-side, plucked out his knee-caps/J
       and causing him to crawl on the rocks, suddenly slew him,
       and buried him in the sand. Accordingly she stationed
       there one man as Governor of Silla, and departed. After..
       wards, the wife of the Prince of Silla, not knowing where
       the body of her husband was buried, all by herself con-
       ceived the thought of deluding the Governor. So,
       enticing him, she said :-' If thou wilt let me know the
       place where the Prince's body is buried, I will surely
       re\vard thee liberally, and will become thy wife.' Here-
       upon the Governor believed these deluding words, and
       secretly made known to her the place where the body was
       buried. Then the Prince's wife and the people of the
       country, having consulted together, slew the Governor,
       and having disinterred the Prince's body, buried it in
       another place. Then they took the Governor's body, and
       buried it in the earth under the Prince's tomb, and taking
       up the coffin, deposited it on the top of the Governor's
       body, saying :-' This is as it ought necessarily to be,
       according to the order of things exalted and things base.'
       Hereupon the Empress: when she heard of this, was

  1   i.e. offering the ship and lands.
  ~ This transliteration follows the traditional Japanese pronunciation. The
Corean would be U-ryu-cho-pu-ri-chi-u. It may be suspected that the final
u r i s a mistake for =f kan, a frequent element of Corean titles, perhaps
= khan, kan1i? See Parker's" Race Struggles in Corea," p. 220.
 3 A Chinese punishtuent.

 "The original has Tenno, a word which, strictly speaking, is either
masculine or feminine, but which is not usually appfied to this Empress.
                                    JINGO.                              235
     mightily incensed, and raised a large army, with which it
     was her intent utterly to destroy Silla. So, with war- IX. 15·
     ships filling the sea, she proceeded thither. At this time
     the people of Silla were .all afraid, and knew not what to
     do. Having assembled, they consulted together, and slew
     the Prince's wife by way of apology for their crime." 1
   Hereupon the three Gods who accompanied the expedition,
viz. Uha-tsutsu no wo, Naka-tsutsu no we, and Soko-tsutsu no
wo, admonished the Empress, saying :-" Let our rough spirits
be worshipped at tlle village of Yamada in Anato." Now

  1  The" Tongkaln," Vol. III. p. 21, has the following under the date
A.D. 249, Sumlner, 4th   month :-" The \\T as invaded Silla, and killed Uro.
Before this the Was had sent Kalyako as Anlbassador to Silla. The King
Inade Uro entertain him. Uro said, jesting :-" Sooner or later we shall
make your King our saltl""slave, and your Queen our cook-\vench." When
the King of Wa heard this, he sent his General Uto-chiu to invade Silla.
The King \vent out and dwelt at Yuchhon. Uro said :-" To-day's attack is
o,ving to the ,yords of thy servant. I pray thee let me deal with it." So
he \vent eventually to the Wa army, and said :-" My words on a former
day \vere a jest, and nothing more. Who \\-·ould have thought that war
should be "raged, and that things should come to this extremity?" The
Inen of Wa took hilTI, and made a pile of firewood, on \vhich they burnt him
to death, and then went away. Afterwards an Ambassador canle froln Wa.
Uro's ,vife begged leave from the King to entertain him on her o\\:n score.
Accordingly she nlade the Ambassador drunk, seized him, and burnt him.
The Was, enraged at this, besieged Keumsyong,*buthad to retire unsuccessful."
   N ot\vithstanding the difference of date-A.D. 200 and A.D. 249-and other
discrepancies, I believe these two narratives relate to the same events. The
Prince U rusohorichiu of the Japanese account is the U ro of the Corean
history. The \vord which I have translated Prince is ::E, which might also
be rendered King. But there is no King of this name in Corean history,
and, as appears from a Corean authority quoted in the "Ishonihonden,"
XIV. I I, Syok U ro \vas the son of King N ahe of Silla. The" Tongkam "
relates several other events of his life, among others his appointlnent as
So-pul-han (or So-pul-ya), whence probably the sohori of the name given
him in the Japanese narrative.
   Kalyako is no doubt the same person as the Katsuraki no Sotsu-hiko
mentioned belo\v as having been sent on a mission to Silla. Kal is \vritten
a,   which is katsura in Japanese.
   In " Early Japanese History" I have given reasons for thinking that, for
this period, Corean history is much luore in accordance with facts than
that of Japan.

                             4'   The Silla capital.
       J26                               N II-lONG.!.
        Homutate, the ancestor of the Atahe of Anato, and Tamomi no
        Sukune, ancestor of the Muraji of Tsumori, represented to the
        Empress, saying :-" Surely thou wilt set apart unto the Gods
        the lands where they desire to dwell." So Homutate was
        appointed master of the \vorship of the rough spirits, and a
        shrine was erected in the village of Yamada in Anato.
            Now in Spring, the second month of the year following the
        expedition against Silla, the Empress removed with her
        ministers and functionaries to the palace of Toyora in Anato,
        where she took up the Emperor's remains, and proceeded
        towards the capital by the sea-route. N o'v Prince Kakosaka
        and Prince Oshikuma, hearing of the Emperor's decease, as
        well as of the Empress's expedition to the West, and of the
         recent birth of an Imperial Prince, plotted secretly, saying : -
         "The Empress has now a child, and all the ministers obey
         her. They will certainly consult together and establish an
         infant sovereign. But shall we, the elders, obey our younger
         brother? " So, pretending that it was in order to build a
         misasagi for the Emperor, they \vent to Harima, and raised a
         misasagi at Akashi. 1 Accordingly they joined boats together
         in a string across to the island of Ahaji, and so transported the
IX. If. stones of that island to build it. No\v they made every man
         take a weapon, and so they awaited the Empress. Hereupon
         J(urami-wake, the ancestor of the Kimi of Inugami, and
         I'sachi no Sukune, ancestor of the Kishi,2 together joined them-

         1 Two or three n1iles to the east of Maiko, on the bluff above the village

       of \Vest rrarulni, there is a very large double mound, ,,,hich local tradition
       has associated with the name of Chiuai Tenn6. It is surrounded by the
       usual circles of clay cylinders, kno\\'n in the neighbourhood as " Chiual no
       sen-tsubo," i.e. "the thousand jars of ChlUat/'
          There is a smaller mound of circular shape close to the other, also sur..
       rounded by a circle of clay cylinders. This is no doubt the ton1b of a ,vife,
       son, or n1inister of the personage buried in the main tU111ulus. The
       " Nihongi " tradition does not account for it.
          The stones were to build the Inegalithic chalnber.
          2 Kishi Ca    Bili) is obviously the salne as the Silla fourteenth official gorade
       kilsa (6 ±). See" Tongkam," 1. 31. Ason, so frequently 111et \vith in later
       times, is also a Corean official grade. Has sukune anything to do with the
       Silla word for king, isakeun ?
          The" Kojiki" has" Kishi of Naniha" in this passage, no doubt r ghtly.
       Ch. K., p. 235.
                                 JINGO.                                 237
selves unto Prince Kakosaka, \vho made them his generals, and
directed them to raise troops from the Eastern Land. Then
Prince Kakosaka and Prince Oshikuma went forth together to
the moor of To~a, and made a "hunt-prayer," 1 saying :-" If
our project is to be successful, then surely let us take some
good game." The two Princes sat each in his shelter, when a
wild-boar ~ sprang out suddenly, and climbing on to the shelter,
bit Prince Kakosaka and killed him. The soldiers every one
shuddered \vith fear. Then Prince Oshikuma addressed
Kurami-\vake, saying :-" This is a very ominous thing. We
ought not to await the enemy here."         So he withdrew his
troops, and retreating again, encamped at Sumiyoshi. 3 At this
time, the Empress heard that Prince Oshikuma had raised an
army, and \vas awaiting her. She commanded Takechi no
Sukune to take in his bosom the Imperial Prince, and going out
across by \vay of the south-sea provinces,· to anchor in the har-
bour of Kil, while the Empress's ship Inade straight for Naniha.
At this time the Empress's ship swerved towards the midst of
the sea, and was ·unable to proceed. She returned again to
the harbour of Muko, 5 where she made divination as to this.
   Hereupon Ama-terasll no Oho-kami admonished her, saying: IX. 17.
-" My rough spirit may not approach the Imperial residence.
 Let him dwell in the land of Hirota in Mikokoro." So Ha-
yama-hime, daughter of Yamashiro-neko, was appointed to
worship him. Moreover, Waka-hiru-me no Mikoto admonished
the Empress, saying :-" I wish to dwell in the land of Nagawo
 in Ikuta." 6 So U na-gami no Isachi was appointed to worship
 her. Again, Koto-shiro-nushi no Mikoto admonished her,
saying :-" Worship me in the land of Nakata in Mi-kokoro." 7
 So Naga-hime, younger sister of Ha-yama-hime, was appointed
to .worship him. Again the three Gods, Uha-tsutsu no we,
 Naka-tsutsu no wo, and Soko-tsutsu no wo, admonished her,
 saying :-" Let our gentle spirits dwell at Nagawo 8 in Nuna-

  1  Ukehi-gari, a kind of divination.
  2  Lit. a red pig, so called from its flesh being red. The dOlnestic pig is
the \vhite pig.
   3 Near Kobe.              • Now called Shikoku.         ' No\v Hioge.
  r. Just behind the foreign settlement of Kobe.

  -; lVlikokoro here and above may mean" after my august heart."
  8 Surniyoshi, near Kobe.
       J26                              NIHONGI.

        kura in Ohotsu, so that they may look upon the ships passing
        back and forward." Hereupon these Gods were enshrined in
IX. 18. accordance with their instructions, and the Empress was
        enabled to cross the sea in peace.
           Prince Oshikuma, "..g ain withdrawing his troops, retreated as
        far as Uji, where he encamped. The Empress proceeded
        southwards to the land of Kii, and met the Prince Imperial at
        Hitaka. Having consulted with her Ministers, she at length
        desired to attack Prince Oshikuma, and removed to the Palace of
        Shinu. It so happened that at this time the day was dark like
        night. Many days passed in this manner, and the men of that
        time said :-" This is the Eternal Night." The Empress
        inquired of Toyomimi, the ancestor of the Atahe of Ki, saying:
        _ H Wherefore is this omen?"     Then there was an old man who
        said :-" I have heard by tradition that this kind of omen is called
        Atsunahi no tsumi." 1 She inquired :-" \Vhat does it mean? "
        He answered and said :-" The priests'2 of the two shrines have
        been buried together." Therefore she made strict investigation
        in the village. There was a man who said ':-" The priest of
        Shinu and the priest of Amano were good friends. The priest
        of Shinu fell ill, and died. The priest of Amano wept and
        wailed, saying :-' We have been friends together since our
        birth. Why in our death should there not be the same grave for
        both?' So he lay down beside the corpse and died of himself,
        so that they were buried together. This is perhaps the
        reason."     So they opened the tomb, and on examination
        found that it was true. Therefore they again changed their
        coffins and interred them separately, upon which the sunlight
        shone forth, and there was a difference between day and
        night.
           3rd month, 5th day. The Empress commanded Takechi no
        Sukune and Take-furu-kuma, ancestor of the Omi of Wani, to
        lead an army of several tens of thousands of men to attack
IX. 19. Prince Oshikuma. Hereupon, Takechi no Sukune and his
        colleague, having taken picked men, went out by way of
        Yamashiro as far as Uji, where they encamped north of the
        river. Prince Oshikuma came out from his camp, and offered


             1   The calamity of there being no sun.        ~   Hafuri.
                                  JINGO.                                  J26

battle. Now there was a man called Kuma 1 no Kori, who
formed the vanguard of Prince Oshikuma's army.
        One version says :-" Ancestor of the Obito of Katsurano
     no ki." Another says :-" The remote ancestor of the Kishi
     of Taka."
   Accordingly, in order to encourage his men, he sang with a
loud voice, saying : -
                      Beyond the river
                      Is the rough pine-clad plain-
                      To that pine-clad plain
                      Let us cross over,
                      With bo\vs of tsuki,
                      And store of sounding arrows.
                      My dear fellow!
                      My dear fello\\'s !
                      My cousin too!
                      My cousins!
                      Conle! let us join battle
                      With U chi no Aso ! 2
                      (Within a tile
                       Is there any sand ?) S
                      Come! let us join battle !                                  IX. 20.

  Then Takechi no Sukune, giving command to the three
divisions of the army, made them all bind up their hair mallet-
wise. Accordingly he made an order, saying :-" Let every
one of you have spare bow-strings concealed in your top-knots,
and gird on wooden swords." Having done so, in accordance
with the commands of the Empress, he deluded Prince Oshi-
kuma, saying :-" I ar:n not greedy to possess the Empire.
Only, while cherishing the infant Prince, we will obey my
Lord the Prince. Why should I contend with thee in battle?

   1 The reader will ha\'e noticed how frequently Kuma, bear, occurs in
proper names. It is, I think, the race Kuma (in Corean, Konla) to \vhich
they should be referred.
   ~ Aso is the same as Ason or 'Asomi, probably derived from Ason
<M    ,~), the 6th Silla official rank. This is the first mention of this
title. The reference is to Takechi (Take-uchi) no Sukune. U chi has a
pillow-word (tamaki haru) prefixed, which is quite untranslatable. CE.
Ch. K., p. 283.
   S These two lines are, of course, utterly irrelevant.  They are brought in
for the sake of a play of ,vords, \vith \vhich it is not worth \vhile troubling
the reader.
       J26                              NIHONGI.

        I pray thee let us both cut our bow-strings, fling away our
        weapons, and be in harmony together. Then mayest thou,
        my Lord the Prince, mount to the Heavenly office, and sit a
        peace, making high thy pillow, and wielding at thy will the ten
        thousand appliances." 1
           So he openly gave orders to his army that they should all
        cut their bow-strings, and ungirding their swords, fling them
        into the river-water. Prince Oshikuma believed these deluding
        words, and ordered all his troops to ungird their weapons and
        fling them into the ,vater of the river, and also to cut their
        bow-strings. Upon this, Takechi no Sukune commanded the
        three divisions of his army to produce their spare bow-strings,
        and to string their bows again, and, girt with their real swords,
        to advance across the river. Prince Oshikuma, seeing that he
        had been deceived, spake to Kurami-wake and Isachi no
        Sukune, saying :-" We have been deceived, and have now no
        spare weapons. How shall we be able to fight?" So he
        withdrew his forces and gradually retreated. Then Takechi no
        Sukune sent forth his choice troops and pursued him, and
        having come up to him just at Afusaka, put him to the rout.
        Therefore that place was called Afusaka. 2 The army took to
        flight, and ran as far as Kurusu in Sasanami. Many were slain.
IX. 21. Hereupon the blood overflowed into Kurusu.            Therefore in
        horror of this, until this day, the fruit of Kurusu 3 is not offered
        to the Inlperial Palace. Prince Oshikuma, not knowing
        \vhither to betake himself in his flight, called to him Isachi no
        Sukune and made a song, saying:-

                          COIne ! my child,
                          Isachi Sukune!
                          Rather than receive a severe wound
                          Franl the mallet 4
                          OfU chi no Aso,
                          Like unto the grebe
                          Let us Inake a plunge!


         1 i.e. all the nlachinery of Gavernn1ent.
         2 Pronounced Osaka, i.e. the hill of Ineeting-. The pass on the road from
       Kioto to ()tsu. A railway tunnel no\\~ goes under it.
        3 Kurusu nleans chestnut-village.

         "Kabu-tsuchi.   See p. 12 3.
                                 JINGO.                                 241

  So they sank together in the crossing-place of Seta, and
died. Then Takechi no Sukune made a song', saying :-
                 The birds that dived,
                 At the ferry of Seta,
                 By the sea of Afumi}
                 Since \\'ith my eyes I cannot see them,
                 Can they be still alive?

  Hereupon they searched for their dead bodies, and were un-
able to find them. But several days after, they came out on
the river·bank at Uji:z Then Takechi no Sukune again made a
song, sayIng : -
                         In the sea of Afumi,
                         At the ferry of Seta,
                         The birds that dhyed-
                         Passing Tanakami,3
                         Have been caught at Uji.

   Winter, loth month, 3rd day. The ministers honoured the
Empress with the title of Grand Empress. This year was the
year Midzunoto I (60th) of the Cycle. It was reckoned the
first year of her administration of the Government.
   2nd year, Winter, 11th month, 8th day. The Emperor was IX. 22.
                                                               A.D. 202.
buried in the misasagi of Nagano, in the province of Kahachi.
   3rd year, Spring, 1st month, 3rd day. The Imperial Prince A.D. 203~
Homuda-wake was appointed Prince Imperial. Accordingly,
the capital was made at Ihare. It was called the Palace of
Wakazakura.
   5th year, Spring, 3rd month, 7th day. The King of Silla A. D. 205.
sent O-nye·sa-pol, Mo-ma-ri Cheul-chi and Pu-ra-mo·chi with
tribute. It \vas their desire to get back Mi-cheul Ho-chi pol-
han, who had formerly come as a hostage. With this object
they tampered with Ho-chi pol-han and caused him to use
deceit, telling him to make petition and say :-" The envoys
O-nye-sa-pol, Mo-ma-ri Cheul-chi, and the other have in-
formed me that my king, on account of my long failure to
return, has wholly confiscated my wife and family and made

  1 N ow called Lake Biwa, in the province of Afumi or Dmi.
  2 Uji is some nliles further do\vn the river issuing froln Lake Bi\\'a than
Seta. Seta is just where it leaves the lake.
  3 The name of the upper part of the Uji River.
       J26                              NIHONGI.

        them slaves. I pray thee, let me return for a while to my
        own country and learn whether this be true or false." The
        Emperor forthwith gave him leave to go, and accordingly sent
        him away, accompanied by Katsuraki no Sotsuhiko. They
IX. 23. reached Tsushima together, and stayed for the night at the
        harbour of Sabi no nmi. Then the Silla envoys Mo-ma-ri
        Cheul-chi and the others secretly provided a separate ship and
        sailors, on board of which they put Mi-cheul Han-ki and made
        him escape to Silla. They also made a stra\v figure which
        they put in Mi-cheul Ho-chi's berth, and making it appear like a
        sick man, they informed Sotsuhiko, saying :-" lVIi-cheul Ho-chi
        has taken suddenly ill, and is on the point of death." Sotsu-
        hiko sent men to nurse him, and so discovered the deception.
        Having seized the three Silla envoys, he placed them in a cage
        which he burnt with fire and so killed them. Then he pro-
        ceeded to Silla, where he touched at the harbour of Tatara.
         He took the Castle of Chhora, and returned. The captives
        taken on this occasion were the first ancestors of the Han 1
IX. 24. people of the four villages of Kuhabara, Sabi, Takamiya, and
        Oshinomi. 2
          1 The Chinese character is    ii,     i.e. the Chinese Han dynasty. The
       interlinear kana has ayabito, which also means Chinese. Possibly they
       were descendants of Chinese emigrants to Corea.
          ~ Under the date A.D. 418, .~utumn, the "Tongkam" (Vol. I\r. 18) has
       the follo\ving : -
          " Pak Che-syang of Silla \vent to Wa and died there. The kil1g~s younger
       brother Misaheun came froln Wa. Before this Pok-ho (another brother of
       the King, \vho had been sent as hostage to Kokuryo) had returned. The
       King addressed Che-syang, saying :-' l\1y love for my t\VO younger brothers
       1S like my left and right arnlS. :NO\V I have got only one arm. "'hat does
       it avail?' Che-syang said :-' Though Iny abilities are those of a broken down
       horse, I have devoted myself to my country's service. What reason could I
       have for declining? Kokuryo, however, is a great country, and the king
       also is \vise. Thy servant \vas able to make hinl understand with one \\'ord.
       But in dealing \vith the Was it ,vill be meet to use stratagem to deceive
       them, and not by mouth and tongue to reason \vith them. I will pretend
       that I have committed a crime and absconded. After I have gone I pray
       thee arrest thy servant's fanlily.' So he s\\'ore upon his life not to see again
       his ,vife and children, and \vent to Nyul-pho. The cable was already
       loosed when his wife came after him, lamenting loudly. Che-syang said :-
       'I have already taken my life in Iny hands, and atn leaving for a certain
       death.'
          A t length he \vent to the \\,7 a country, "'here he gave out that he ,vas a
                                  JINGO.                                 243
  13th year, Spring, 2nd month, 8th day.              Takechi no Sukune A.D. 21 3.


rebel. The Lord ofWa doubted this. Before this time men of Pekche had
gone to the Wa country, and nlade a false report, saying :-' Silla and
Kokuryo are about to plot together to attack Wa.' The Lord at length sent
troops to guard the frontier. And \\Ohen Kokuryo, having invaded Silla,
sle\v those guards also, the Lord of Wa believed that the story told by the
Pekche men ,vas true. But \vhen he heard that the King of Silla had im-
prisoned the family of Misaheun and Che-syang, he thought that Che-
syang ,\'as re311y a rebel. Hereupon he sent forth an army in order to
attack Silla, and made Che-syang and Misaheun guides. Coming to an
island in the sea, all the generals consulted secretly ho\v they should
destroy Silla and return \vith Che-syang and Misaheun's wives and children.
Che-syang, kno\ving this, sailed with Misaheun every day in a boat, under
the pretence of making pleasure excursions. The \Vas had no suspicion.
 Che-syang advised Misaheun to return secretly to his country. Misaheun
said :-' How could I haye the heart to abandon thee, my lord, and return
alone?' Che-syang said :-' Supposing that I succeed in saving nlY Prince's
 life, and thus gratify the feelings of the Great King, it \vill be enough,
 Why should I be so fond of living?' Misahelln wept, and taking his leave,
 Inade his escape back to his country. Che-syang alone slept in the boat.
 He got up to\vards evening and \vaited until Misaheun \vas far on his
,vay. The VvT as, when they found that Misaheun had disappeared, bound
 Che-syang, and pursued Misaheun, but mist and darkness coming on,
they could not overtake hiln. The Lord of Wa was enraged. He flung
 Che-syang into prison, and questioned him, saying :-' Why didst thou
 secretly send a,vay Misaheun ? ' Che-syang said :-' As a subject of Kelin
 (Silla), I sitnply \vished to carry out the desires of my Lord.' The Lord of
 Wa was \vroth, and said :-' i\S thou hast now beconle a vassal of mine, if
 thou callest thyself a vassal of Kelin, thou shalt surely be subjected to the
 five pllnishnlents. But if thou callest thyself a vassal of the Wa country, I
 \vill certainly re\\Oard thee liberally.' Che-syang said :-' I had rather be a
 puppy-dog of Kelin, than a vassal of the Wa country. I had rather be
flogged in Kelin than have dignities and revenues in the \Va country.' The
 Lord of "Va ,vas \vroth. He flayed Che-syang's feet, cut sedge, and made
him walk on it (perhaps on the stubble left after the sedge was cut). Then
 he asked him, saying :-' Of what country art thou the vassal?' He said :-
 'The vassal of Kelin.' He also made hinl stand on hot iron, and asked
 hinl :-' Of what country art thou the vassal?' He said :-' The vassal of
 Kelin.' The Lord of Wa, seeing that he could not bend him, put him to
 death by burning.
    The King, hearing of this at the island of l\iokto~ \vas nluch grieved, and
 conferred on Che-syang the posthulnous title of Great Ason. He also
 besto\ved rewards on his family, and Inade 1\1isaheun marry his second
daughter; and afterwards Che-syang's wife, taking \\Tith her her three
daughters, \vent up to a Inountain \vhence she had a vie\v of the \Va country,
          244
          J26                             NIIIONGI.

          was commanded to go with the Prince Imperial and worship
          the Great God of Kebi in Tsunoga. 1
            17th day. The Prince Imperial returned from Tsunoga.
          On this day the Grand Empress gave a banquet to the Prince
          Imperia 1 in the Great Hall. The Grand Empress raising her
          cup wished long life to the Prince Imperial. Accordingly she
          made a song, saying:-
                                This august liquor
                                Is not lny august liquor:
                                This prince of liquors 2
                                He that dwells in the Eternal land
                                Firm as a rock-
                                The august God Sukuna,
                                With words of plenteous blessing,
                                Blessing all around-
                                With \vords of divine blessing
IX. 25·                         Blessing again and again-
                                Hath sent as an offering to thee.
                                     Drink of it deeply.
                                     Sa! Sa! a


          and having wailed bitterly, she died. She ,,"as made the Goddess-mother
          of this nl0untain, and there is no\v a shrine there."
            This, no doubt, relates to the same events as the above passage in
          the" Nihongi" Che-syang is Mo-ma-ri and Misa-heun is Mi-cheul-Ho-chir
            The Corean nanles present nluch difficulty. I have given the Corean
          pronunciation of the Chinese characters \vith which they are written, but
          there is much room for doubt \\·hether the Japanese pronunciation \vould
          not sometimes be better. The text cannot be relied on.
             The interlinear kana gives as the names of the three envoys, Ureshi-
          hotsu, Momari Shichi, and Furanlochi, and of the hostage, Mishi Koehi
          hotsu-kan. Here shichi is probably for    fr    ~ (sya-chi), the 13th official
          rank in Silla.
            A Chinese authority quoted by Parker, in "Race Struggles in Corea':'
          gives one or t\VO examples of Kilin (Kelin or Silla), ,vords \vhich show that
          1000 years ago the language "ras the saIne as modern Corean.            But I
          cannot recognize anything of the modern language in the Corean naInes of
          the "Nihongi." Later, all proper names in Corea are of Chinese derivation.
          Many of the Corean ,vords in the "Nihongi" are names of offices, all of
          which are replaced in modern Corean by \vords of Chinese derivation.
             1 Now Tsuruga in Echizen.      See eh. K., p. 237.
            2 In the original" Kushi no Kanli."      The interpretation given above is
          Moto\vori's. This line might also mean" the wondrous deity" or the" God
          of liquor or sake."
            3 An interjection of encouragement or inciteulent.
                                  JINGO.                                  245
  Takechi no Sukune, on behalf of the Prince Imperial, made
an answering song, saying:-

                       The man who brewed 1
                       This august liquor,
                       Setting up on the mortar
                       His drum,
                       Singing all the while,
                       He must have brewed it.
                       This august liquor
                       Is exquisitely more and more delightful.
                            Sa! Sa!

  39th year. This year was the year 'fsuchinoto Hitsuji A.D. 239·
(56th) of the Cycle.
       The History of Wei says :-" In the reign of the Emperor
     Ming Ti, in the third year of the period King-ch'n (A.D.
     239) the Queen of Wa sent the high officer Nan-teu-mi
    and others to the province, where they begged permission
    to proceed to the Emperor and offer tribute. The T'ai-
    sheu,' Tang-hia, sent an officer to escort them to the
    capital."
  40th year.                                                   A.D. 240.

       The History of Wei says :-" In the first year of Cheng-
     Shih, Kien Chung-kiao, Wei T'i-hi and others proceeded
     to the Wa country charged with an Imperial rescript and
    a seal and ribbon." 8

    1 The Japanese word for brew is k3Juu, ,vhich also nleans to chew.     Was
chewing ever a part of the process of making strong drink in Japan as it is
in some of the South Sea islands at the present time? The last line of this
poem is of very doubtful interpretation.
   2 T'ai-sheu means governor.      The-pang (in Chinese Tai-fang) was at one
tinle a district of the Chinese province of Lolang in Corea. A nlap of China
under the Tsin dynasty, however, makes The-pang a separate district further
to the north. But the Governor of The-pang mentioned in the Wei history
under the name of   id I       and the Governor of Lolang called by the" Tong-
kam~'  Itl   1t are probably the same person.
   Another authority makes The-pang identical with Namwon in Chollato.
   :i These officials, as we learn from other sources, were sent by the Chinese
authorities of Sakpang in Corea, not far from the present Treaty Port of
W()nsan. See" Early Japanese History," p. 58; "Ishonihonden," I. I I ;
"Tongkam/' I I1. 17.
              J26                             NIHONGI.

A.D.   243· 43rd year.
                 The Ruler 1 of Wa again sent high officers as envoys
               with tribute, named I Shing-che, Yih- Ye-~yoh,~ and others
               -eight persons in all.
A.D. 246.    46th year, Spring, 3rd month, 1st day. Shima no Sukune
          was sent to the Land of Thak-s~yun.3 Hereupon Malkeum
          Kanki,4 King of Thak-syun, informed Shima no Sukune,
          saying :-" In the course of the year Kino~ye Ne, 0 three men
          of Pekche named Kutyo, Mi-chyu-nyu, and Moko 6 came to m:y
          country and said :-' The King of Pekche, hearing that in the
          Eastern quarter there is an honourable country, has sent thy
          servants to this honourable country's court. Therefore we beg
          of thee a passage so that we may go to that Land. If thou
          wilt be good enough to instruct thy servants and cause us to
          pass along the roads, our King will certainly show profound
          kindness to n1Y Lord the King.' 7 I then said to Kutyo and his
  IX. 26. fellows :-' I have always heard that there is an honourable
          country in the East, but I have had no communication with it,
          and do not know the way. There is nothing but far seas and
          towering billows, so that in a large ship, one can hardly conl-
          municate. Even if there were a regular crossing-place, how
          could you arrive there?' Hereupon Kutyo and the others
          said :-' Well, then, for the present we cannot communicate.
          Our best plan will be to go back again, and prepare a ship with
          which to communicate later.' They also said :-' If envoys
          should come from the honourable country, thou oughtest surely
          to inform our country.' Thus they went back. Hereupon

                l~.
                ~  I t is doubtful whether these six syllables represent the nalnes of one,
              two, or three men. I cannot guess what Japanese nalnes are meant. The
              " Ishonihonden " gives SOlne of the characters differently.
                The" Shukai " edition rejects these extracts from Chinese History. They
              were doubtless added at a later date.
                S The Chinese characters are •       iJ, of which the traditional kana render-
              ing is Toku-shiu. The" Shukai" editor says it was part of Imna (or Mimana).
              Its destruction by Silla is recorded belOW-5th year of KiInmei Tenno.
                 4 The Japanese traditional rendering is Makin Kanki.

                 5 A.D. 244.

                6 The Japanese kana gloss has Kutei, Mitsuru, and Mako.

                 7 This is quite inconsistent with the story of Pekche offering haulage to
              the Empress in the early part of her reign.
                                 JINGO.                                  247
Shima no Sukune sent one of his followers named Nihaya, and
a Thak-syun man named Kwa-ko to the Land of Pekche to
make friendly inquiries of the King's health.
   King Syo-ko 1 of Pekche was profoundly pleased, and received
them cordially. He presented to N ihaya a roll each of five
kinds of dyed silk, a horn-bow 2 and arrows, together with
forty bars of iron.:~ Thereafter he opened his treasure-house,
and pointing to his various rare objects, said :-" In my country
there is great store of these rare treasures. I have wished
to pay tribute of theln to the honourable country, but not
knowing the way I was unable to carry out my intention. I
shall now entrust them to envoys, who will visit your country IX. 27.
in order to offer them." Nihaya took charge of this message,
and on his return informed Shima no Sukune, who thereupon
came back from Thak-syun.
    47 th year, Summer, 4th month. The King of Pekche sent A.D. 247·
 Kutyo, Mi-chu-nyu and Ma-ko with tribute. Now a tribute
envoy from Silla came along with Kutyo. Hereupon the Grand
 Empress and the Prince Imperial Homuda wake no Mikoto
 were greatly delighted and said :-" People from the countries
 wished for 4 by our late Sovereign have now come to Court.
 Alas! that they cannot meet the Emperor!" There was not
 one of all the ministers who did not shed tears. But when the
 articles of tribute of the two countries were examined, the
 Silla tribute was of rare objects in very great number, while
 the Pekch6 tribute articles were few and mean, and of no value.
 So inquiry ,vas made of Kutyo and the others, saying :-" How
 is it that the Pekche tribute is inferior to that of Silla ?" They
 answered, and said ;-" We lost our way and arrived at Sabi.:>

  1 There are two kings of this name in Corean history. The first died
A.D. 214.  This is the second, who reigned from A.D. 346 to A.D. 375. The
Japanese chronology is, as usual, at fault.
  2 The Corean bow is to this day the Tatar bow described in TyIor's
Anthropology as "formed of several pieces of wood or horn united with
glue or sinews. Shorter than the long-bow, it gets its spring by being bent
outside to string it." The Japanese bow is a variety of the ordinary long-bo\\?
  3 I ron is plentiful in Corea at the present day, and its quality is much
esteenled.
  " On the contrary, Chiuai Tenno would have nothing to do with them.
  ~ A Sabi in Tsushima is mentioned above. But this may be a place in
Corea, in \vhich case it should be read Sapi.
                                                                     s
        J26                             NIHONGI.

           Here thy servants were captured by men of Silla and confined
          in a gaol. After three months had passed, they wished to kill
           us. Then Kutyo and the rest looked up towards Heaven, and
          pronounced a curse. The men of Silla, fearing this curse,
           refrained from killing us, but robbed us of our tribute. Then
          they gave us the tribute of Silla in exchange for our tribute,
          and made it the tribute of thy servants' country, and they
          spake to thy servants, saying :-' Be careful what ye say, or
          else, as soon as we return, we will kill you.' Therefore we,
           Kutyo and the rest, were afraid, and made no objection. For
          this reason we have hardly been able to reach the Heavenly
          Court." Then the Grand Empress and Romuda wake no
           Mikoto charged the Silla envoys with this deed, and accord-
          ingly prayed to the Gods of Heaven, say'ing :-" Whom is it
          meet that we send to Pekche to examine this matter whether
          it be true or false; whom is it meet that we send to Silla to
          investigate this charge?" Therewith the Gods of Heaven
          admonished them, saying :-" Let Takechi no Sukune prepare
          a plan, and let Chikuma Nagahiko be the envoy. Then it will
          be as you desire."
  IX. 28.         Chikuma Nagahiko's title (~1:) is unknown. One account
                says :-" Chikuma Nagahiko was a man of the province
                of Musashi, the first ancestor of the present Obito of
                Tsukimoto of the Nukada Be."
                  The Pekche record 1 says :-" Shimananaga hiko was
                perhaps this man."
             Hereupon Chikuma N agahiko was sent to Silla to call that
          country to an account for meddling with the Pekche tribute.
A.D. 249.    49th year, Spring, 3rd month. Areda wake and Kaga wake
          were made generals. Along with Kutyo and the others they
          prepared a force with which they crossed over and came to
          Thak-syun. They were accordingly about to invade Silla,
          \vhen some one said :-" Your troops are too few. You cannot
          defeat Silla." They respectfully sent back again Sya-pek Ke-ro

          1 This Pekche record is frequently quoted from.    Frorn the circumstance
       that the character :I, honourable, is used by the author or authors before tbe
       word country in speaking of Japan, it Inay be inferred that it was compiled by
       Pekche Coreans from their ov:n records for the information of the Japanese.
       I have not much doubt that it was the vlork of some of the Corean scholars
       w'bo visited Japan in numbers during the seventh century.
                                    JINGU.                                   249
to ask for reinforcements. ~fong-na Keun-cha and Sya..sya
Nok,ve 1
        These t\VO men's surname is unknown. But Mongna
     Keuncha was a Pekche general.
\vere forthwith ordered to take command of choice troops
\vhich were sent along with Sya-pek Ke-ro. They all assembled
at Thak-syun, invaded Silla, and conquered it. Seven provinces
were accordingly subdued, viz. Pi-cha-pun, South Kara, Tok-
kuk, Ara, Tara, Thak-s.yun, and Kara. 2 Then they moved
their forces, and turning westward, arrived at Ko-hye-chin,
where they slaughtered the southern savages of Chim-mi-ta-nye
and granted their country to pekche. Hereupon their King,
Syoko,3 together with Prince Kusyu, came to meet them with IX. 29·
more troops. Then fauf villages, viz. Pi-ri, Phi-chung, Pha-
mi-ki, and Pan-ko, spontaneously surrendered. Thereupon
the Kings of Pekche, father and son, met Areda wake, Mong-na
Keuncha, and the rest at the village of Wi-niu [1l0W called
 Tsurusugi-; / and at an interview offered their congratulations
and dismissed. them with cordial courtesy. But Chikuma
N agahiko remained in the Land of Pekche with the King of
Pekche, where they ascended ~Iount Phi-ki and made a solemn
declaration. Afterwards they ascended Mount 5 Ko-sya, where
they sat together upon a rock, and the King of Peke he made a
solemn declaration, saying :-" If I spread grass for us to sit
upon, it might be burnt with fire; and if I took wood for a
seat, it might be washed a\vay by water. Therefore, sitting on
a rock, I make this solemn declaration of alliance to show that
it will remain undecayed to distant ages. From this time


  1    In Japanese Mokura Konshi and Sasa Toki.
   :.: These places, in so far as they can be identified, did not belong to Silla,
but to Imna. The identification of Corean names of places presents great
difficulties, owing to the Corean tuania for giving ne\v nanles. The" Chosen
Zenzu furoku," a little book published by the Japanese \Var Office, gives as
lnany as eight aliases for S0111e to\vns. N early all have several.
  3 Reigned 346 to 375, \vhen he \vas succeeded by KUSyll.       The" Nihongi "
names are nearly correct.
  .. Japanese pronunciation.
  a Mountain is in the interlinear kana ll1ure, no doubt the modern Corean
moi. Sin1ilarly, nare, river, \vhich occurs in Kutna-nare, is in Inodern Corean
nai, pronounced n('.
         J26                        NIHONGI.

          forward, therefore, for a thousand autumns and for ten thou-
          sand years, without pause and without limit, we shall bear the
          regular title of' The Western Frontier Province,' and every'
          spring and every autumn will attend your Court with tribute."
           So he took with him Chikuma Nagahiko to his capital, where
          he treated him with the most cordial courtes}~. He also made
           Kutyo and the others escort him hOlne.
A.D. 250.    50th year, Spring, 2nd month. Areda wake and his com-
          panions returned.
              Summer, 5th month. Chikuma Nagahiko, Kutyo and the
          rest arrived from Pekche. Thereupon the Grand Empress was
           delighted, and inquired of Kutyo, saying :-" The various Han 1
          countries west of the sea have been already granted to thy
          country. Wherefore dost thou come again repeatedly?"
           Kutyo and the others said to the Empress :-" The vast
  IX. 30. blessings of the Celestial Court reached afar to our mean
           village, and our king capered with delight. Out of the fulness
           of his heart he has sent a return mission in token of his great
           sincerity. Though it come to the ten thousandth year, in what
           year shall we fail to attend thy Court?" The Grand Empress
           gave command, saying :-" Good are thy words. These are
           Our intentions. We grant in addition the Castle of Tasya to
           serve as a station in going and returning."
A.D. 251.     51st year, Spring, 3rd month. The King of Pekche again
           sent Kutyo to the Court with tribute. Hereupon the Grand
           Empress addressed the Prince Imperial and Takechi no Su-
           kune, saying :-" We owe it to Heaven and not to man that we
           have a friendly country like Corea. Therefore it brings con-
           stantly, without missing a year, tribute of trinkets and rarities
           such as there have never been before. We, seeing this true
           affection, are always rejoiced at it, and so long as we live will
           heartily besto¥l on it Our favour."
              That same year she despatched Chikuma Nagahiko to the
            Land of Pekche in company with Kutyo and the others.
           Accordingly, in the most gracious manner, she said :-" We,
           in accordance with the divine testimony, having for the first
           time laid open a road, subdued the lands west of the sea and
           granted them to Pekche, would now again draw closer the
           bonds of friendship and make lasting our loving bounty."
                                      1   Corean.
                                   JIN(;O.                                 J26

   At this time the Kings of Pekche, father and son, both together
knocked their foreheads on the ground and made representa-
tion, saying: -" The immense bounty of the honourable
country is more weighty than Heaven and Earth. What day,
what hour shall we presume to forget it? The sage sovereign IX. 31.
dwells above, illustrious as the sun and moon; thy servants
now dwell below, solid as a mountain or hill, and will always
be thy western frontier land, never to the last showing double
hearts."
   52nd year, Autumn, 9th month, loth day. Kutyo and the A.D. 252.
others came along with Chikuma N agahiko and presented a
seven-branched 1 sword and a seven-little-one 2- m irror, \vith
variou~ other objects of great value.        They addressed the
Empress, saying :-"West of thy servants' country there is a
river-source which issues from Mount Ch6lsan 3 in Kong-na.
It is distant seven days' journey. It need not be approached,
but one should drink of this water, and so having gotten the
iron of this mountain, wait upon the sage Court for all ages."
Moreover, he 4 addressed his grandson, Prince Chhinl-nyu,b
saying :-" The honourable country east of the sea with which
we are now in communication has been opened to us by
Heaven. Therefore does it bestow on us Celestial bounty,
and dividing off the land west of the sea, has granted it to us.
Consequently the foundation of our land is confirmed for ever.
Thou shouldst cultivate well its friendship, and having col-
lected our national products, wait on it with tribute \vithout
ceasing. Henceforth, grudging not even our lives, let us
continue to send yearly tribute."
                                                                   A.D. 255.
   55th year. Syoko, King of Pekche, died.r                        IX. 32.
   56th year. Kusyu, son of the King of Pekche, was set up as A.D. 256.
king.;
  1 The traditional kana rendering is nana-saya, i.e. a "seven-sheathed

sword," which is nonsense. Seven-branched is not much better.
  ~ It is not clear \vhat is meant by nanatsuko   (-I::  T), perhaps \\·ith seven
projections round the rim. See above, p. 44.
  S Iron mountain.     All this about iron is ll1erely symbolical of constancy.
  4 The King of pekche.                        ,j Came to the throne A.D. 384.

  6 The" Tongkam" places his death in A.D. 375.

  7 The traditional kana rendering of ~ is Kokishi, a word I do not recog-
nize as Corean. But nearly all Corean words relating to official matters
have become obsolete, being replaced by Chinese ternlS.
            J26                            NIHONl";I.

A.D. 262.  62nd year. Silla did not attend the Court. The same ,Tear
         Sotsuhiko was sent to chastise Silla.
                The Pekche record says :-" The year Midzuno~ye Miima.!
              Silla did not wait upon the .honourable countr)r. The
             honourable country sent Sachihiko to attack it. The men
             of Silla dressed up two beautiful women whom the)r sent
             to meet Sachihiko at the port and inveigle him. Sachihiko
             accepted them, and turning aside, attacked the land of
             Kara. K wi-pan 2 Kanki, King of Kara, and his sons, Pek-
             ku-chi, A-syu-chi, Ik-sya-ri, I-ra-ma-chyu, and I-mun-chi,
             fled to Pekche, taking with them their subjects. Pekche
             received them cordially, and Kwi-chon-chi, younger sister
             of the King of Kara, went to Great Wa and addressed the
             Empress, saying :-' Your majesty sent Sachihiko to attack
             Silla. But he has accepted beautiful women of Silla, and
             abandoned the ih rasion. On the contrary he has destroyed
             our country. M~' brothers and our people have all been
             driven into exile. Unable to bear my grief, I have come
             hither to make this representation.' The Empress was
             greatly enraged, and forthwith sent Mongna Keunchii in
             command of an army to bring them together in Kara and
             to restore the temples of the Earth and of Grain."
                One account says :-" Sachihiko, when he learnt that
             the Empress was wroth with him, did not dare to return
             openly, but hid himself. He had a younger sister who
             was in the service of the Imperial Palace. Hiko secretly
             sent a messenger to inquire of her whether or no the
             Empress's wrath had abated. She, pretending a dream,
             said to the Empress :-' To-night, in a dream, I saw
             Sachihiko.' The Empress was greatly enraged, and
 IX. 33.     said :-' How should Hiko dare to come?' The Em-
             press's 3 words were reported to Sachihiko, who seeing
             that he would not be pardoned, went into a cave of
             a rock and died."

              1 19th year of the Cycle, corresponding to A.D. 382.
              2 I Si.Pheum was the name of the King of Kara at this time, according to
            the" Tongkam."
              3 The \\7ord for Empress is Tenno, which may also mean Emperor, and

            indeed this suits the narrative better.
                              JINGO.                             253
  64th year. l Kusyu, King of Pekche, died, and his son A.D. 2 64.
Chhim-nyu was set up as king.
  65th year. King Chhim-nyu of Pekche died. 2 His son A.D. 26 5.
Ahwa was a child, and his father's younger brother, Sinsa, by
usurpation was set up and made king. s
  66th year.                                                   A. D. 266.

       This year was the second year of the period T'ai She of
     the Emperor Wu Ti of the Tsin Dynasty. R'i Kii..chu of
     Tsin says :-" In the loth month of the 2nd year of the
     period T'ai..she of Wu Ti, the Queen of Wa sent inter-
     preters with tribute."
   69th year, Summer, 4th month, 17th day. The Grand A. u. 2 69.
Empress died in the Palace of Waka..zakura at the age of 100.
   Winter, loth month, 15th day. She was buried in the
misasagi of Tatanami in Saki. On this day, by way of
posthumous honour to the Grand Empress, she was called
Okinaga Tarashi·hime no Mikoto.
   This year was the year Tsuchinoto Ushi (26th) of the Cycle.

  1   The" Tongkam" has A.D. 384.
  ~ This is mentioned almost in the same ,vords by the" Tongkam " under
date A.D. 38S-just two cycles later.
  3 The narrative from p. 246 do\vn to this point contains a solid
nucleus of fact. There can be no doubt that Japan at an early period
formed an alliance with Pekche and laid the foundation of a controlling
power over the territory: kno\vn as Ilnna or Mimana \vhich lasted for
several centuries. But the Japanese chronology cannot be right. See.
"Early Japanese History," p. 62.
                              BOOK      x.
                      THE EMPEROR HOMUDA.


                         (OlIN 1 lENNO.)

THE   Emperor Homuda 2 was the 4th child of the Emperor
Tarashi Nakatsu-hiko.       His mother's name was Okinaga
Tarashi-hime no Mikoto. The Emperor \vas born at Kata in
Tsukushi in the 12th month, Winter, of the year Kanoye Tatsu,3
being the year in which the Empress smote Silla. From a
child he was intelligent, penetrating, and far-sighted. In his
bearing and conduct there were amazing indications of sageness.
In the third year of the Grand Empress's administration of the
Government, he was raised to the rank of Prince Imperial.
Before this time, when the Emperor was in the \vomb, the
Gods of Heaven and Earth granted to him the three Han. 4
vVhen he was born there was flesh growing on his arm in shape
like an elbow-pad}) As to this resemblance, the Empress
judged that it was the elbow-pad worn as a manly accoutre-
ment. Therefore he was styled by this name, and called the
Emperor Homuda.
       In the earliest antiquity, the tomo was commonl)T called
     Homuda.
       One account says :-" In the beginning, when the
     Emperor was made Heir to the Throne, he went to the

  J Responding to the Gods.
  2  The "Kojiki" calls him Homuda wake. Homuda or Honda is the
name of a place.
  3 17th of the Cycle.                         4 Corea.

  a The /011l0 or leather shield worn on the fore-arm by archers as a pro-
tection against the recoil of the bow-string.
                                    OlIN.                                255
     Land of Koshi, and did worship to the Great God of Tsu-
     tsuhi in Tsunoga. At this time the Great God and the
     Heir to the Throne exchanged names. Accordingly the
     Great God was called the God Isasa-wake and the Heir to
     the Throne Homuda wake no Mikoto. 1
   In the 69th year of her administration of the Government,
Summer, the 4th month, the Grand Empress died.
                                                                 X.2.
   1st year, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. The Prince Imperial A.D. 270
assumed the Dignity. This year was the year Kanoye Tora
(27th) of the Cycle.
   2nd year, Spring, 3rd month, 3rd day. Nakatsuhime was A.D. 271.
appointed Empress. She gave birth to the Imperial Princess
Arata, to the Emperor Oho-sazaki, and to the Imperial Prince
 Netori. Before this the Emperor had taken to him as concu-
bine the Empress's younger sister, Takaki Iribime, who bore to
him the Imperial Prince Nukada no Oho-naka-hiko, the Im-
perial Prince Oho.. yama-mori, the Imperial Prince Iza no
mawaka, the Imperial Princess Oho-hara, and the Imperial
Princess Komida. Another concubine, a younger sister of the
Empress, named Otohime, bore to him the Imperial Princess
Ahe, the Imperial Princess Ahaji no Mihara, and the Imperial
Princess Ki no Uno. The next concubine, daughter of Hifure
no Omi, the ancestor of the Wani no Omi, by name Miya-
nushi-yaka-hime, bore the Imperial Prince Uji no \Vaka-
iratsuko, the Imperial Princess Yata, and the Imperial Princess
Medori. The next concubine, named Oname..hime, the
younger sister of Yaka-bime, bore the Imperial Prince Uji no
waka-iratsu-me.      The next concubine, named Oto-hime,
daughter of Kaha-mata Nakatsu hiko, bore the Imperial
Prince Wakanoke Futa-mata. The next concubine, named X·3·
Mago-hime, younger sister of Osabi, Muraji of the Sakurawi-
da Be, bore the Imperial Prince Hayabusa wake. The next
concubine, named Naga-hime, of Idzumi in Hiuga, bore tIle
 Imperial Princes Oho-haye and Wo-haye.
   In all the sons and daughters of this Emperor were together
twenty Princes and Princesses.' The Imperial Prince Netori
was the first ancestor of the Kimi of Ohota. The Imperial Prince

 1   There is a Semitic practice of men adopting Gods' names.
 2   C£ Ch. K., p. 243, which makes 26 children, and differs in some details.
         J26                           N IIIONGI.
          Oho-yama-mori was the first ancestor of the two families of the
          Kimi of Hiji-kata and the Kimi of Haibara. The Imperial
          Prince Iza no ma\vaka was the first ancestor of the \\Take of
          Fukagaha.
A.D. 27~.    3rd year, loth month, 3rd day. The Eastern Yemishi all
          attended the Court with tribute. They were employed to
          make the Muma-zaka road.
             11th month. The fishermen of several places clamoured
          noisily, and would not obey the Imperial command. So Oho-
          hama no Sukune, ancestor of the Muraji of Adzumi, was sent
          to subdue this clamour. He was accordingly made controller
          of the fishermen. This was the origin of the proverbial saying
          of the people of that time, viz. Sawa-ama or "clamorous
          fishermen. "
             This year King Sinsa of Pekche was disrespectful to the
          Celestial Court. Therefore Ki no Tsuno no Silkune, Rata no
    x. 4. Yashiro no Sukune, Ishikaha no Sukune and Tsuku no Sukune
          were sent to call him to an account for his rudeness. Here-
          upon the people of Pekche slew Sinsa by way of apology. Ki
          no Tsuno no Sukune and the others accordingly established
          Ahwa as king, and returned (to Japan).l
A.D. 274.    5th )rear, Autumn, 8th month, 13th day. The various pro-
          vinces ~"ere directed to establish Be of fishermen and Be of
          mountain wardens. 2
             Winter, loth month. The province of Idzu was charged
          with the duty of constructing a ship 10 rods 3 in length~ As
          soon as it was completed, it \vas launched on the sea for a
          trial. It floated lightly, and was as s\vift as a racer. There-
          fore that ship was called Karallo.
              [It £s a 111lstake to make the ship called Karano because £t was

            1 The" Tongkam," under date A.D. 392, has the following :-" loth month.

         The king of Pekche \vent to hunt on Ku-won (dog-moor). I'en days elapsed
         without his returning. 11th 1110nth. King Sinsa of Pekch6 died in his
         travelling palace on Dog-moor. Ahwa, son of King Chhinl-nyu, came to
         the throne." Note that the Corean and Japanese chronologies differ by
         exactly 120 years, or t\\·o cycles. But the two stories are apparently
         irreconcilable. See belo\v, X I. 26.
            J Gamekeepers or huntsmen, whose business       it ,vas to supply the
         Imperial table.
            3 Of ten feet.
                                  OjIN.                                  257
lig/tt and swift. Perhaps this is a corruption by men of later
times of Karullo. 1J
   6th )'ear, Spring, 2nd month. The Emperor n1ade a progress A.D. 275
to the province of Afumi. "'Then he arrived near the Moor X. 5·
of Uji, he made a song, saying : -
               When I look upon the moor of Kadzu
               In Chiba,
               Both the hundred thousand fold abandant
               House-places are visible,
               And the land's acme is visible. 2

   7th year, Autumn, 9th month. Men of Koryn, men of A.D. 27 6.
Pekche, men of Imna, and men of Silla 3 all together attended
the Court. Orders were then given to Takechi no Sukune to
take these various men of Han and make them dig a pond.
Therefore the pond was given a name, and was called the pond
of the men of Han. ~
   8th year, Spring, 3rd month. ~Ien of Pekche attended A.D. 277·
Court.
        The Pekche record says :-" King Ahwa came to the
      throne and was disrespectful & to the honourable country.
      Therefore we were despoiled of Chhim-mi-ta-ryo, Hyon-
      nam, Chi-chhim, Kong-na, and Eastern Han. Herewith
      Prince Chik-chi 6 was sent to the Celestial Court in order
      to restore the friendship of former kings.
   9th year, Summer, 4th month. Takechi no Sukune was A.D. 278.
sent to Tsukushi to inspect the people.          Now U mashi no
 Sukune, Takechi no Sukune's younger brother, setting aside
 his elder brother, slandered him to the Emperor, (saying that)
 Takechi no Sukune had always designs upon the Empire. "I
 now hear," said he, " that while he is in Tsukushi, he is secretly

   1 Kara means ,vithered, and no, IUOOT, or the latter may be put phonetically

for no the genitive particle. Karu means light. The" Shukai " editor rejects
this note.
   2 From Ch. K., p. 245, q.v.
   3 The traditional kana rendering has Kama, Kudara, !\limana and
 Shiraki.
   4 Or "men of Kara."    Compare Ch. K., p. 25 2 .
   o See above, p. 25 6, where it is said that it was King Sinsa who ,vas dis.
 respectful.
   6 The" Tongkam " calls him Tyonchi, and places this event in 397.
      J26                       NIHONGI.

      plotting to that end, saying (to himself), , Alone I will cut off
      Tsukushi, and will invite the three Han. to come and do
      homage to me, so that finally I may possess the Empire.' "
         Hereupon the Emperor straightway sent messengers to slay
      Takechi no Sukune. Now Takechi no Sukune cried out,
x. 6. saying :-" I have not two hearts, but serve my prince with
      loyalty. What a calamity is this that I should die without a
      crime! "
         Now there was a man named Maneko, ancestor of the Atahe
      of Iki, who in appearance strongly resembled Takechi no
      Sukune. All by himself he grudged that Takechi no Sukune's
      innocent life should be vainly thrown away. So he spoke to
      Takechi no Sukune and said :-" Now the Great Minister 1
      serves his Prince with loyalty, and has not had a black heart.
      All the Empire knows this. I pray thee leave this place
      secretly, and, prC>.ceeding to the Court, personally unfold thine
      innocence. After this it will not be too late to die. Moreover
      the people of this time are always saying that thy slave resem-
      bles the Great Minister in appearance. Therefore I will now die
      in the place of the Great Minister, and so make clear the Great
      Minister's redness of heart." 2 So he threw himself on his
      sword, and slew himself. Then Takechi no Sukune, alone,
      grieving greatly for him, secretly left Tsukushi, and embarking
      on the sea, went round by way of the Southern Ocean. Anchor-
      ing in the harbour of Ki, he hardly succeeded in making his
      way to the Court, where he explained his innocence. The
      Emperor forthwith questioned Takechi no Sukune along with
      Umaslli no Sukune, upon which these two men were each ob-
      5tinate, and wrangled with one another, so that it was
      impossible to ascertain the right and the wrong. The Emperor
       then gave orders to ask of the Gods of Heaven and Earth the
      ordeal by boiling water. Hereupon Takechi no Sukune and
       U mashi no Sukune went out together to the bank of the Shiki
       river, and underwent the ordeal of boiling water. Takechi no
       Sukune was victorious. Taking his cross-sword, he threw
       down Umashi no Sukune, and was at length about to slay
       him, when the Emperor ordered him to let him go. So he
      gave him to the ancestor of the Atahe of Kit.
                 1 •
                   I.e. you.                     : Sincerity.
                                     OjIN.                                 259
   11th year, Winter, loth month. The Tsurugi, Kakaki, and A.D. 280.
                                                               X·7·
Mumaya-zaka ponds were made.
   This year there \vas a man who made representation to the
Emperor, saying :-" There is in the land of Hiuga a maiden
\vhose name is Kami-naga-hime. 1 She is the daughter of Ushi-
moro\vi, the Kimi of Muragata. She is distinguished for beauty
over all the Land." The Emperor was pleased, and wished in
his heart to obtain her.
   13th ~year, Spring, 3rd month. The Emperor sent a special A.n. 282.
messenger to summon Kami-naga-hime.
   Autumn, 9th month. Kami-naga-hime arrived from Hiuga,
and was straight,vay settled at the village of Kuhadzu. Now
the Imperial Prince, Oho-sazaki no 1vlikoto, when he saw Kami-
naga-hime, ,vas struck with the beauty of her form, and had a
constant love for her. Hereupon the Emperor became aware
of Oho-sazaki no Mikoto's passion for Kami-naga-hime, and
wished to unite her to him. Therewith the Emperor, on the
day that he gave a banquet in the hinder palace,2 sent for
Kami-naga-hime for the first time, and so gave her the upper
seat in the banqueting-room. Then he brought in Oho-sazaki
no Mikoto, and pointing to Kami-naga-hime, made a song,
sayIng : -
                       COlne ~ my son!
                       On the luoor, garlic to gather,
                       Garlic to gather
                       On the "ray as I went,
                       Pleasing of perfume
                      \Vas the orange in flower.
                       I ts branches beneath
                      Men had all plundered,
                       I ts branches above
                      Birds perching had ,,'ithered.                             X 8.
                      [0 f th ree chestnuts] 3
                      :Midmost, its branches
                      Held in their hiding
                      .0\. blushing nlaiden.
                      Come! and for thee, my son,
                       Let her burst into blosS0111.

  Hereupon Oho-sazaki no Mikoto, being favoured with this

 1    The long-haired lady.                    ~ i.e. the women's apartments.
 :J   This is a Inere makura-kotoba of little or no meaning.
       260
       J26                             NIHONGI.

       poetry, forthwith understood that he was receiving Kami-naga-
       hime as a gift; and, greatly delighted, made a song in reply,
       saying :-
                           In the pond of Yosami
                          \Vhere the water collects,
                           The marsh-rope coils
                          Were growing, but I knew not of them:
                           In the river-fork strea111,
                          The water-caltrops shells
                          Were pricking me, but I knew not of them.
                          Oh, 111y heart!
                           How very ridiculous thou wert! 1

         Oho-sazaki no Mikoto, after the consummation of his union
       with Kami-naga-hime, was very attentive to her, and when he
       was alone with her, made a song, saying : -
                            The maid of Kohada
                            Of the further province!
                            As of a God
                            Though I had heard of her,
                            We are folded in each other's anns.

         Again he made a song, saying:-
                                The maid of Kohada
                                Of the further province-
                                Oh ! how I love her
                                As she lies
X·9·                            Unresisting!

               One account says :-" Ushi, the Kimi of Morogata in
             Hiuga, was in the service of the Court. But having
             become old in years, he was unable to serve, and so,
             having ceased his service, he retired to his own land.
             Thereupon he offered the Emperor his own daughter,
             Kami-naga-hime. When she first arrived at Harima, the
             Emperor had made a progress to the island of Ahaji, and
             was hunting there. Hereupon the Emperor, looking
             towards the west, saw several tens of stags swimming

          1 In the" Kojiki " this poem is attributed to the Eluperor.    See Ch. K.,
       p. 249. The marsh-rope is the Brasenia peltata, according to Chamberlain.
       The general meaning of the poem seems to be: "What a fool I was to be
       in such despair as to be unconscious of bodily suffering, while happiness was
       all the while near file ! "
                                  OjIN.                                 261

     to,vards hiln over the sea. Presently they entered the
     harbour of Kako in Harima. The Emperor addressed his
     courtiers, saying :-' \Vhat stags are these \vhich come in
     numbers s\vimming over the great sea?' Then the cour-
     tiers all looked at them and wondered. So a messenger
     was sent to make examination. The messenger, ,vhen he
     came there, saw that they were all men, only they had for
     clothing deer-skins with the horns attached. He inquired
     of them, saying :-' What men are ye?' They replied,
     saying :-' Ushi, the Kimi of Morogata, being old in years,
     has ceased his service, but he cannot forget the Court.
     Therefore he offers his own daughter, Kami-naga-hime.'
     The Emperor was delighted, and sending for her, made
     her follo\v the Imperial ship. · For this reason, the men of
     that time called the place where the:y reached the shore
     the harbour of Kako! It was perhaps at this time that
     the practice began of using the word kako as a general
     name for sailors."
   14th year, Spring, 2nd month. The King of Pekche sent as A.D. 28 3.
tribute a seamstress named Maketsu. 2 She was the first
ancestress of the present seamstresses of Kume. 3 This year the
Lord of Yutsuki. 4 came from Pekche and offered his allegiance. x. 10.
Accordingly he addressed the Emperor, saying :-" Thy servant
was coming to offer allegiance with one hundred and t\venty
districts of the people of his o\vn land, when the men of Silla
prevented them, and they were all forced to remain in the land
of Kara." Hereupon Katsuraki no Sotsuhiko ,vas sent to bring
the men of Yutsuki from Kara. Now three years passed, and
Sotsuhiko did not come.
   15th year, Autumn, 8th month, 6th day. The King of A.D. 284.
Pekche sent A-chik-ki with two quiet horses as tribute. So
they were fed in stables on the acclivity of Karu. Accordingly
A-chik-ki was appointed to have charge of their foddering.

  1 Kako is written with characters \vhich mean deer-little-one.
  t I have here followed the traditional kana pronunciation. The Corean
pronunciation of the Chinese characters would be Chin-rna-chin. i\nother
reading makes t\VO WOlnen.
  3 In Yamato.
  • y"utsuki is the traditional rendering of the characters i=} .,ij. This in
Corean would be Kung-wol.
        J26                             NIHONGI.

          Therefore the place where the horses were kept was named
          Mumaya-saka. 1 Moreover, A-chik-ki was able to read the
          classics, and so the Heir Apparent, Uji no Waka-iratsuko,2 made
          him his teacher. Hereupon the Emperor inquired of A-chik-ki,
          saying :-" Are there other learned men superior to thee? " He
          answered and said :-~' There is Wang-in,3 who is superior."
          Then Areda wake, ancestor of the Kimi of Kodzuke, and
          Kamu nagi wake were sent to Pekche to summon Wang-in.
   x. II. This A-chik-ki was the first ancestor of the A-chik-ki (or
          Atogi) no Fumi-bito. 4
A.D. 285.    16th year, Spring, 2-nd month. Wang-in S arrived, and
          straightway the Heir Apparent, Uji no Waka-iratsuko, took him


          1   Stable-hill.
          ~   But he was not the heir. Oho-sazaki was heir. See Ch. K., pp. 254
        and 257.
           :i The traditional reading is Wani, \"hich is also found in the" Kojiki."

           oJ Scribes.

            5 There are clear indications that the Chinese language and character
        \\'ere not wholly unknown in Japan from a time which Inay be roughly put
        as coinciding ,vith the Christian epoch.   But this knowledge ,vas probably
        confined to a few interpreters. There \vere no schools, and no official
        records. The arrival of Wangin was therefore a most important event in
        Japanese history. It was the beginning of a training in Chinese ideas
        which has exercised a profound influence on the whole current of Japanese
        thought and civilization up to our own day.
           The date given for it in the "Nihongi," however, cannot be correct.
        As I have endeavoured to show in a paper on " Early Japanese History"
        contributed to the Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan, Wangin's
        arrival must be placed 120 years later, i.e. in 405 instead of in 285. Whether
        the whole chronology of this period requires to be altered accordingly, as
         I am disposed to believe, or only the dates of those events which relate to
        Corea, is a question \\~hich has not yet received an adequate answer. It
        is curious that the "Killjiki " omits alllnention of them.
            Corea preceded Japan by only a very short time in the establishment of
        schools of Chinese learning and in the institution of official records.
         Kokuryo established a High School in 372, and Pekche appointed a Professor
        of Chinese two years later. Before this time, says the" Tongkaln," Pekche
         had no written records. See~' Writing, Printing, and Alphabet in Corea,:'
         " ].R.A.S.," 1895.
            A-chik-ki is the Corean pronunciation of the characters PiiJ iRli·    The
         traditional rendering in kana is Achiki or Atogi. The" Kojiki " calls him
         Achi-Kishi, "'here Kishi is written a     (I, the name of a Corean rank of
         no great elninence.
                                   OlIN.                            J26

as teacher, and learnt various books from him. There was none
which he did not thorouo'hly understand. Therefore the man
called Wang-in was the first ancestor of the Fumi no Obito. 1
   In this year King Ahwa of Pekche died. The Emperor then
sent for Prince Tyon-chi)~ and addressed him, saying :-" Do
thou return to thy country and succeed to the (royal) Dignity."
Accordingly he further granted to him the territory of Eastern
Han, and so dismissed him. 3
        Eastern Han comprises Kam-na-syong, Ko-nan-syong,
     and I-rim-syong. 4
  8th month. Kidzu no Sukune of Heguri and Tada no
Sukune of Ikuba were sent to Kara. Choice troops were
granted them, and the Emperor commanded them, saying:-
" The long delay in Sotsuhiko's return must be owing to his X. 12.
being detained by the opposition of the men of Silla. Do you
go speedily, assail Silla, and open a way for him." Hereupon

  1   FUlui no obito, chiefs of \vriting.
  2   Prince Tyon-chi. The" Nihongi" has   if!  ~ here and below (2 5th year),
                                                           M,
\vhich would be in Corean Chik-chi. But ICi is a mistake for       the former
character having slipped in from the name of the horse-keeper mentioned
above.
   3 The follo\ving are the notices in the "Tongkam" relating to Prince

Tyonchi's being sent to Japan :-
   " Reign of Ahwa, 6th year, Summer, 5th 1110nth. Pekche made friends A.D. 397
with Wa. Tyonchi, the Heir Apparent, was sent as a hostage."
   " Reign of Ahwa, 14th year, Autunln, 9th Inonth. King Ah\va of Pekch~ A.D. 405.
died. The Heir Apparent Tyonchi had not returned froln Wa, whither he
had gone as a hostage. Tyonchi's next younger brother, Hunhe, administered
the Government in expectation of the Heir Apparent's return. The youngest
brother, Syol-Iye, slew Hunhe, and set hilnself up as King. When Tyonchi
heard of the King's death, he wept bitterly, and asked permission to return.
The Lord of Wa gave Tyonchi one hundred soldiers as an escort. When
he arrived at the frontier, a n1an of Hansyong 1 named He·chhung came to
meet him, and said :-' The Great King (Ahwa) having left this world,
Syol-Iye sle\v his elder brother and set up himself as King.. I pray that the
Heir Apparent will prolnptIy take nleasures for this.' Tyonchi, guarded by
the Wa soldiers, repaired to an island in the sea, and Inade provision there
while the people of the land killed Syol-Iye, and going to meet (Tyonchi),
established hitn as King." "Tongkam," I I I. 14.
  .. -Syong means a \valled city.

                      1   The present capital of Soul.
                                                                T
         J26                             NIHONGI.

          Kidzu no Sukune and his colleague moved forward their choice
          troops and arrived at the Silla frontier. The King of Silla was
          afraid, and confessed his guilt, so they brought away with them
          the people of Kungwol 1 and Sotsuhiko.
A.D. 288.    19th year, Winter, loth month, 1st day. The Emperor
          made a progress to the Palace of Yoshino. 2 At this time the
          Kuzu 8 came to his Court, and presenting to the Emperor
          newly.. brewed sake, made a song, saying:-

                          At Kashinofu
                          A cross-mortar 4 \ve lnade :
                          In that cross-mortar
                          The great august sake that \ve have brewed
                          S\veetly
                          Do thou partake of it
                          Dh! our father! 0

              When the song was finished, they drummed on their mouths
           and looked up laughing. At the present time, on the day that
           the Kuzu 6 present their country's produce to the Emperor,
           when their song is finished they drum on their mouths and look
           up laughing. This custom is probably a relic of antiquity.
           Now the Kuzu are very plain and honest in character. They
           commonly gather wild berries for food, and they also boil frogs,
  x. 13. which they reckon a great dainty, calling them kebi. Their
           country lies to the south.. east of the capital, on the other side of
           a mountain. There they dwell by the River Yoshino (amid)
           steep cliffs and deep ravines. The roads are narrow, with deep
           hollows. Therefore, although the distance from the capital is
           not great, their visits to Court had been rare. However, from
           this time forward they came frequently, bringing the produce
           of their country to present to the Emperor. This produce
           consists of such things as chestnuts, mushrooms, and trout.
A.D. 2 89.    20th year, Autumn, 9th month. Achi no Omi, ancestor of


           1  Or Yutsuki.                        ~ In the south of Yanlato.
           3  Local chieftains.
           .. It is not clear \vhat a crOSS-lnortar was. Vlde Ch. K., p. 25 I.
           5 The word translated father is chl, which is also used more generally as a

         term of respect. Perhaps" Lord" might be better here.
           6 Seventeen was their nUlnber in later times, according to the Yengi Shiki.
                                   OlIN.                                  J26

the Atahe of the Aya 1 of Yamato, and his son Tsuga no Omi x. 14·
immigrated to Japan, bringing with them a company of their
people of seventeen districts.
   22nd year, Spring, 3rd month, 5th day. The Emperor made A.D. 291.
a progress to Naniha, where he dwelt in the Palace of Oho-
suml.
   loth day. He ascended a lofty tower and had a distant
prospect. Now he was attended by his concubine Yehime,
who, looking towards the west, lamented loudly. Hereupon
the Emperor inquired of Yehime, saying :-" Why dost thou
lament so bitterly?" She answered and said :-" Of late thy
handmaiden has been thinking fondly of her father and mother,
and so, looking towards the west, unawares she made lament. I
pray thee let me return for a while that I may see my parents."
Hereupon the Emperor loved Yehime's tender thought for the
warmth and coolness 2 of her parents, and addressing her,
said :-" Many years have passed since thou hast seen thy
parents. It is clearly right that thou shouldst wish to return

   1 Aya is the traditional Japanese rendering of ii,  i.e. Han, the nalue of a
Chinese dynasty. No satisfactory explanation of the reason why this
character should be read aya has been given. As a mere guess, I would
suggest that Hada or hata for" (Ts'in), Kure for Wu ~ and Ayafor Han
may have been names given {roln the textile products with which these three
Chinese dynasties, or the emigrants, may have been associated; Hada or
Hata meaning 100m or cloth generally, Kure, dyed stuffs (for Kurenawi, pink
or scarlet), and Aya, figured stuffs. There were numerous weavers among the
Corean (or Chinese) emigrants to Japan. See below, A.D. 306. ~"'or Kure,
another derivation is that which nlakes it luean "distant," a sense in \vhich
it occurs more than once in the "Manyoshiu," and in a poem in the
" Nihongi," Reign of Saimei, year 4.
   This family was called the Aya of Yamato to distinguish it from another
family of the same name in Kahachi. These two families were also kno\vn
respectively as the Higashi no Aya, or Eastern Aya, and the Nishi no
Aya, or Western Aya.
   Motoori (" Kojikiden," XXXII I. 39) shows that, like other events relating
to Corea in this part of the " N ihongi," this ilnmigration must be dated 120
years later.
   The Yamato Aya claimed descent from the Emperor Ling-ti of the Later
Han dynasty, who reigned A.D. 168 to 190. We are told that on the fall of
that dynasty in 221, Prince Achi fled to Corea, whence he subsequently
emigrated to Japan; but ho\v much of this is true it is impossible to say.
Cf. Ch. K., p. 253.
   ~ i.e. thoughtfulness for her parents' comfort.
      266
      J26                             NIHONGI.

      and visit them." So he granted her permission, and summon-
      ing eighty fishermen of Mihara in Ahaji and makinf{ sailors of
      them, sent her to Kibi.
        Summer, 4th month. Yehime set sail from Ohotsu 1 and
      departed.
x. 15· The Emperor, standing on the high tower, looked towards
      Yehime's ship and made a song, saying:-

                              Thou Island of Ahaji
                              With thy double ranges ; ~
                              Thou Island of Adzuki
                              With thy double ranges-
                              Ye good islands
                              *         •          •         .3
                              Ye have seen face to face
                              My spouse of Kibi.


          Autumn,9th month, 6th day. The Emperor hunted in the
       Island of Ahaji. This island lies beyond the sea to the west of
       Naniha. There is a confusion of peaks and cliffs; hills and
       valleys succeed to one another. Fragrant herbs grow luxuri-
       antly; it is washed by the long billows. Moreover, great deer,
       wild ducks, and wild geese are abundant in that island. There-
       fore the Emperor made frequent excursions thither. 4 Now the
       Emperor, going round by way of Ahaji, made a progress to
       Kibi and went on an excursion to the Island of Adzuki.
          11th day. He again removed his dwellin~ to the Palace of
X. 16. Ashimori in Hata. Then Mitomo wake presented himself and
       entertained the Emperor, employing his brother, children and
       grandchildren as stewards. Hereupon the Emperor, observing
       the reverential fear with which Mitomo wake waited on him,
       was pleased, and accordingly, having divided the province of
       Kibi, granted it in fee to his children; that is to say, dividing
       off the district of Kahashima, he granted it to the eldest son,
       Inehaya wake. He was the first ancestor of the Omi of Shimo-


        1 Ohotsu is literally" great port." Perhaps Ohosaka is lueant.
        2 Showing a double row of Inountain peaks.
        3 The sixth line of the original is unintelligible.
        4 Riding in his carriage, says the original, a Chinese expression which is

      not meant to be taken literally.
                                    OlIN.                                   J26

tsu-michi. 1 Next he took the district of Kamu-tsu-michi and
granted it to the middle son, Nakatsuhiko. 2 He was the first
ancestor of the Omi of Kamu-tsu-michi and of the Omi of Kaya.
Next he took the district of Mino and granted it to Otohiko. 3
He was the first ancestor of the Omi of Mino. Afterwards he
took the district of Hakuke and granted it to Ahiru wake, the
younger brother of Mitomo wake. He was the first ancestor of
the Omi of Kasa. Accordingly he took the district of Sana x. 17"
and granted it to his elder brother, Urakori wake. He was the
first ancestor of the Atahe of Sono. And taking the district of
Hatori-be, -4 he granted it to Yehime. Wherefore his descendants
dwell to this day in the Land of Kibi. This is the reason of it. 5
   25 th year. King Tyon-chi of Pekche died. 6 Accordingly A.D. 294·
his son Ku-ni-sin became King. The King was a child.
Therefore Mong-nlan-chi of Yamato 7 took the administration
of the State. He had an intrigue with the King's mother, and
his conduct was in many ways improper. The Emperor
hearing this, sent for him.
        The Pekche record says :-" Mong-man-chi was the
      son of Mong-na Keunchi1,8 born to him of a Silla woman

   1 Shln10-tsu-n11chi means the lo\ver road, i.e. the part of the province

furthest from the capital. KalTIu-tsu..nllchi, on the other hand, is the higher
road-the part nearest the capital.
   ~ :\liddle prince.              3 Younger prince.            4 Weavers.

   a If \ve take a broad view of Japanese History \ve shall recognize in it a
constant oscillation bet\veen t\VO forms of governulent. At one time there
is a strong central authority \\·ith local governors ren10vable at pleasure or at
short intervals. By degrees the latter offices become hereditary and luore
independent of the throne, so that eventually a sort of feudal system is the
result. Then the pendulum s\\"ings back again, and under a strong ruler
the old centralized government is restored, while the local nobles, deprived
of effective authority, retain their titles only.
    ~ otwithstanding the nUlnerous inlperfections of the record, it is clear that
in ()jin's reign the feudal system prevailed. To,vards the end of the seventh
century, again, \ve find a tuuch more centralized fornl of government. The
 Revolution of 1868 is a renlarkable exalnple of a rapid change from a feudal
system to a strong central government. The converse process is always
far more gradual.
   6 The" Tongkanl " gives A.D. 420 as the year of Tyon-chi's death.         The

    i Or Great Wa.    *
 usual difference of 120 years is therefore not exactly realized in this case.

    M See above, p. 249-
                           ~.
                           This does not look like a Japanese nalne.
        268
        J26                             NIHONGI.

               when he invaded that country. The great services of his
               father gave him absolute authority in Imna. He came
               into our country and went back and forward to the
               honourable country,· accepting the control of the Celestial
               Court. He seized the administration of our country, and
               his power was supreme in that day. The Emperor, hearing
               of his violence, recalled him."
A.D. 297.    28th year, Autum.n, 9th month. The King of Koryo sent an
          envoy to the Court with tribute. He presented an address, in
          which it was said :-" The King of Koryo instructs the Land of
   x. 18 Nippon." Now the fIeir Apparent, Uji no Waka-iratsuko, read
          this address and was enraged. He reproached the Koryo envoy
          with the rudeness of the address and tore it up.~
A.D. 300.    31st year, Autumn, 8th month. The Emperor commanded
          his ministers,S saying :-" The Government ship named Karano
          was sent as tribute by the Land of Idzu. It is rotten, and
          unfit for use. It has, however, been in Government use for a
          long time, and its services should not be forgotten. Shall we
          not keep the name of that ship from being lost, and hand it
          down to after ages? " The ministers, on receiving this com-
          mand, made the functionaries take the timber of that ship and
          use it as firewood for roasting salt. Herewith they got five
          hundred baskets of salt, which were freely given away to the
          various provinces, and the latter were accordingly caused to
          build ships. Upon this, all the provinces at the same time
          sent up ships as tribute, to the number of five hundred, which
          all assembled in the harbour of Muko. At this time the Silla

          1 Japan.
          2 If this story were true, it would have to be dated 120 years later.     But
        even then Koryo was still Kokuryo. The name Koryo did not come into
        official use till A.D. 918, though as a literary designation examples of it may
        be found as early as A.D. 500. Koryo, however, is out of place in an
        ostensible quotation from a {omlal official document of this period, and
        shows that this story is untrue or much garbled.
          The term Nippon for Japan is also an anachronism. It was not officially
        notified to Corea until A.D. 670, though there are examples of its use earlier
        in the saine century.
           Waka-iratsuko did not beconle Heir Apparent until A.D. 309 (of the" Ni..
        hongi " chronology), and as he is there alluded to as being of tender years,
        he must have been at this time a somewhat precocious prince.
           3 See above, p. 257.
                                     0JIN.                              26 9
                                                                         J26

tribute-envoys were stopping along with them at Muko. 1
Hereupon, of a sudden, fire broke out in the Silla lodgings. It
presently spread to the fleet of ships, so that many of them
were burnt. In consequence of this, the Silla men were called
to an account. The King of Silla, when he heard of it, was
afraid, and, greatly alarmed, sent tribute of skilful workmen.
They were the first ancestors of the Wina 2 Be. In the begin-
ning, when the ship Karallo was burnt as fire\vood for making
salt, some ,vas left over from the burning. It was thougllt
 strange that it did not burn, and it was accordingly presented
to the Emperor. The Emperor wondered at it, and had it
 made into a koto, which had a ringing note, and could be
 heard afar off. Then the Emperor made a song, saying : -

                         (The ship) Karano                                        x. 19.
                         Was burnt for salt :
                         Of the renlainder
                         :\ koto was made.
                         \Vhen it is played on,
                         (One hears) the saya-saya a
                         Of the SUlllmer trees
                         Brushing against, as they stand,
                         The rocks of the Inid·harbour-
                         The harbour of Yura.

  37th year, Spring, 2nd month, 1St day. Achi no Omi and A.D. 306.
Tsuga no Omi 4 were sent to Wu,f» to procure seamstresses.
Now Achi no Omi and his companions crossed over to the
Land of Koryo, and endeavoured to reach Wu.         But on
arriving at Koryo they knew not the road at all, and begged

       Hi6go, or son1e place in the vicinity, is meant.
   2   1\ place in Settsu.
    :J Saya-saya is an ononlatopoetic word for rustling, equivalent to the

 French frou-frou.
     Yura is in Ahaji. Cf. eh. K., 285.
     oj They ,vere Coreans. See above, p. 264.
     3 Wu ~, called by the Japanese Go or Kure, was a Chinese dynasty,

 the last sovereign of which ,vas deposed A.D. 280, long before the despatch of
 these envoys. We learn, ho\\'ever, from a note to the" Shukai " edition that
 this appellation \vas applied (perhaps popularly) to all the six dynasties
 established at Nanking or the neighbourhood from Wu to Chen inclusive,
 i.e. from A.D. 229 to 589. To this day a draper's shop is called in Japan a
 Go-fuku..ya, or " house for Go-clothing."
        J26                             NIHONGI.

           Koryo to give them persons who knew the road. The King
           of Roryo sent with them as guides two men called Kureha and
           Kureshi. 1 In this way ·they were enabled to reach Wu. The
           King 2 of Wu thereupon gave them four women as workwomen,
           namely Ye-hime, Oto-hime, Kure-hatori and Ana-hatori. 3
A.D. 308.    39th year, Spring, 2nd month. The King of Pekche sent
          his younger sister, the Lady Sin-cha-to,4 to wait upon (the
          Emperor as his concubine). Now the Lady Sin-cha-to came
          over, bringing in her train seven women.
   X.20.
A.D. 309.
             40th year, Spring, 1st month, 8th day. The Emperor
          summoned to him Oho-yama-mori no Mikoto ;) and Oho-sazaki
          no Mikoto, and inquired of them, saying :-" Do ye love your
          children?" They answered and said ._" We love them ex-
          ceedingly." Again he inquired :-" Which are most dear-
          the elder ones or the younger?" Oho-yama-mori no Mikoto
          answered and said :_H There is none like the elder." On this
          the Emperor showed displeasure. Then Oho-sazaki no Mikoto,
          who had previously observed the Emperor's expression of face,
          answered and said :-" The older has experienced many colds
          and heats, and has already become a man, so that there is no
          reason for anxiety' about him. But in the case of a young child
          one knows not whether he will reach manhood or not, and for
          that reason he is very pitIable." The Emperor was greatly
          pleased and said :-" Thy words are truly in accordance with
          my feelings." At this time it was the Emperor's constant

           1 The Chinese characters given in the text seem to be only Japanese
        phonetic renderings of the names, and I have therefore not given them their
        Corean sounds, which ,vould be Ku-nye-pha and Ku-nye-chi. But they do
        not look like real names. They appear to be made up of Kure, the name of
        the dynasty, or rather of the country ruled by it, and a ternlination.
           2 Some local authority must be intended.

           3 These names mean respectively" elder lady," "younger lady," " Kure

        weaver," and "hole weaver." But Ana, hole, is probably a mistake for Aya, the
        Japanese name of the Chinese Han dynasty. Wu (or Kure) and Han (or
        Aya) weavers are mentioned together belo\\', year 14 ofYuriaku's reign. See
        also above, p. 265.
          .. The Japanese traditional reading is Shi-se-tsu. The" Shukai " edition
        rejects the name Chikchi, \vhich in the older editions follows pekche. It is
       -not in the old books, and besides his death has been already recorded
        above.
          b He was the son of an inferior consort.
                                   OjIN.                                  J26

desire to establish Uji no Waka-iratsuko as Prince Imperial, and
so he wished to conciliate the minds of the two Imperial
Princes. Therefore he started this inquiry. On this account
he was displeased with Oho-yama.mori no Mikoto's answer.
   24th day. Uji no Waka-iratsukowas established as successor
(to the throne). On the same day Oho-yama-mori no Mikoto 1
was appointed to the charge of the mountains, rivers, woods,
and moors, while Oho-sazaki no Mikoto was made Assistant to
the Prince Imperial, and caused to administer affairs of State.
   41st year, Spring, 2nd month, 15th day. The Emperor died A.D. 310
in the Palace of Toyo-Akira at the age of IIO.~
        One account says :-" He died in the Palace of Oho..
      kuma."
   In this month Achi no Omi and his companions arrived in
 Tsukushi from Wu. No\v the Great God of Muna-gata 3 asked
for workwomen. Therefore Ane-hime was offered to the Great
 God of Muna..gata. She was the ancestor of the Mitsukahi 4 no
 Kimi, who now dwell in the Land of Tsukushi. He then took
 with him the three women, and proceeded to the Land of Tsu. b
 But when he reached Muko the Emperor was dead and he was
 too late. Accordingly he offered them to Oho-sazaki no Mikoto.
 The descendants of these women are the present seamstresses
 of Kure and the seamstresses of Kaya. 6

   1 His name~ Great.lTIountain.,varden, already indicates this office.   There
is a distinction bet\veen the characters for Mikoto applied to the elder and
younger brothers, the latter having the nlore honorific character no doubt
because he afterwards becanle Emperor. See above, p. 2.
   ~ The" Kojiki "says I 30.     He \vas deified at a later period under the
name of Yahata or Hachitnan as the God of War, and there are nlany shrines
in his honour standing at this day.
    3 In Chikuzen.

    4 Mitsukabi nleans "august messenger."                   a Settsu.
    6 Kaya is written with the characters for" Musquito-net."   There is a place
 in Bittchiu of this name, but written with different characters.
                            BOOK XI.

                   THE EMPEROR OHO-SAZAKI.


                    (NINTOKU2 TENNO.)

THE Emperor Oho-sazaki was the fourth child of the Emperor
Homuda. His mother's name was Nakatsu-hime no Mikoto.
She was a granddaughter of the Imperial Prince Ihoki-iri-hiko.
The Emperor from his childhood was intelligent and sagacious,
and his face was fair to look upon. When he grew to manhood
he was indulgent and humane. The Emperor Homuda died in
Spring, the 2nd month of the 41st year of his reign. N ow the
Prince Imperial offered to cede the Dignity to Oho-sazaki no
Mikoto. He would not assume the Imperial Dignity, but
advised with Oho-sazaki no Mikoto, saying :-" He that shall
rule over the Empire and govern the myriad subjects should
overspread them like Heaven, and comprehend them like Earth.
If there is above a cheerful heart with which to employ the
people, the people are happy and the Empire tranquil. But
here am I, a younger brother, and moreover wanting in talent.
How shall I presume to succeed to the Dignity and to enter
upon the Celestial task? But thou, 0 great Prince, art dis-
tinguished in appearance and of a far-reaching benevolence.
Thou art also of ripe years and art fit to become Lord of the
 Empire. The late Emperor established me as his Heir. But
was this for my abilities? No, it was simply because he loved
me. Moreover, there is the weighty matter of the service of
the Ancestral shrines and of the Gods of the Earth and of Grain. a
 For this thy servant is wanting in ready tact and is unmeet to

  1 Great-wren. See below, XI. 7.                  2 Benevolence-virtue.
  3 ~rheseexpressions are simply borrowed from Chinese books, and have no
bearing on Japan~se ancient institutions or ideas.
                           NINTOKU.                          273
                                                             J26

fill the office. No\v, there is a general principle admitted by XI. 2.
both ancient and modern times that the elder brother should
be above and the younger brother below, that the wise man
should be Lord and the stupid man a vassal. Let the Prince
therefore unhesitatingly assulne the Imperial Dignity, and I
will be simply his servant and assistant." Oho-sazaki no
Mikoto answered and said :-" It was the intention of the late
Emperor that the Imperial Dignity should not be vacant for a
single day. Therefore he made choice beforehand of an
illustrious virtue and established the Prince as his duplicate.
The succession he bestowed on thee and the people he granted
to thee. Let us honour his preference, and publish it through-
out the land. Wanting in wisdom though I am, shall I dis-
regard the command of the late Emperor, and without con-
sideration comply with the request of the Pr'ince, my younger
brother? "
    He firmly declined and would not receive it, and each of
them wished to transfer (the sovereignty) to the other.
    At this time the Imperial Prince Nukada no Oho..naka-tsu-
hiko, intending to take charge of the official rice-lands and
granary of Yamato, addressed Oli no Sukune, ancestor of the
Omi of Idzumo, vvho was the officer charged with these official
rice-lands, saying :-" These official rice-lands were originally XI. .1
Mountain-\varden-Iand, and therefore I will now take the
management of them. Thou oughtest not to hold them."
    Now OU no Sukune reported the matter to the Prince
Imperial, \vho spake to him, saying :-" Do thou represent the
Inatter to Oho-sazaki no Mikoto." Hereupon Oli no Sukune
made representation to Oho-sazaki no Mikoto, saying :-" The
Imperial Prince Oho-naka-tsu-hiko will not allow thy servant
to manage the official rice-fields which were placed in his
charge." Oho-sazaki no Mikoto inquired of Maro, the ancestor
of the Atahe of Yamato, saying :-" It is stated that the official
rice-lands of Yamato were originally Mountain-warden-Iand.
How is this? " He answered and said :-" Thy servant knows
not. But thy servant's younger brother, Akoko, knows." It
happened that at this time Akoko had been sent to the Han)
country and had not yet returned. Hereupon Oho-sazaki no

                            1   Corea.
      274
      J26                           NIHONGI.

       Mikoto spake to Oli, saying :-" Do thou go thyself to the Han
       country and summon A~oko. Go quickly, travelling day and
       night." So he assigned to him eighty fishermen of Ahaji as
       sailors. Hereupon Oli proceeded to the Han country, and
       straightway came accompanied by Akoko. Accordingly he was
       asked about the Yamato official rice-lands. He replied, saying:
       -" I have heard by tradition that, in the time of the Emperor
       who reigned in the palace of Tamaki at Makimuku, l the official
       rice-fields of Yamato were settled in the charge of Oho-tarashi-
       hiko no Mikoto, the Prince Imperial. At that time there was
       an Imperial Decree to the effect that the official rice-lands of
       Yamato were always to be the official rice-lands of the reigning
       Sovereign, and could not be held by anyone who was not the
       reigning Sovereign, even an Emperor's child. It is therefore
       wrong to say that this is Mountain-warden-Iand."
          Then Oho-sazaki no Mikoto sent Akoko to the Imperial
       Prince Nukada no Oho-naka-tsu-hiko, and made him acquaint
       him with these circumstances. The Imperial Prince Oho-naka-
       tsu-hiko knew not at all what to do, and Oho-sazaki no Mikoto,
       recognizing that he was in the wrong, forgave him and did not
       punish him.
XI. 4.    Thereafter Prince Oho-yama-mori ~ was full of resentment
       that he was passed over by the late Emperor and not established
       as Prince Imperial. In addition he had this cause of hatred.
       So he plotted, saying :-" I will kill the Prince Imperial and
       will ultimately ascend to the Imperial Dignity." Hereupon
       Oho-sazaki no Mikoto, having heard beforehand of his plot,
       secretly advised the Prince Imperial to prepare soldiers for his
       protection. Then the Prince Imperial got ready troops and
       awaited him. The Imperial Prince Oho-yama-mori, not know-
       ing that soldiers had been prepared, took with him only a few
        hundred fighting men, and starting in the middle of the night,
        proceeded thither. At dawn he arrived at Vji, and was about
        to cross the river when the Prince Imperial, having put on

        1  Suinin Tenno.
        ~  Clearly Oho-yama-mori is the sanle person who is spoken of above as
      Nukada no Oho-naka..tsu-hiko. Either Nukada all through the above
      passage is a mistake, or the genealogy (p. 255) which makes two persons of
      them is wrong. I think the latter more likely, Oho-yalna-mori being an
      official designation, and N ukada, etc., the name.
                                  NINTOKU.                             275
                                                                       J26

hempen garments, took the helm, and secretly mingled with
the ferrymen. He then took the Imperial Prince Oho-yama-
mori on board and ferried him over as far as the middle of the
river, where he induced the ferrymen to step on the (side of
the) boat and make it heel over. Hereupon the Imperial
Prince Oho-yama-mori fell into the river and sank. But he
rose to the surface again, and while floating down the stream
made a song, saying,-

                        At the ferry of Uji
                          :Me     :Me         *1
                       Anlong the pole-lnen
                       Those \vho are nimblest
                       \Vill come to Ine.

  But a large number of ambushed soldiers sprang up, so that
he was unable to reach the bank, and he finally sank and died.
Search was caused to be made for his dead body, and it came
to the surface at the ferry of Kahara. Then the Prince
Imperial seeing the dead bod)T, made a song, saying,-

                        o thou l\layumi tree
                        For Adzusa bo\\'s
                        That gro\vest by the ferry-
                        The ferry of Uji !
                          :Ie     :Ie         •

                        In my heart I thought
                        To cut thee,
                        In my heart I thought
                        To take thee,
                        But at the bottoln,                                   XI. 5.
                        Of my lord I bethought me,
                        But at the top,
                        Of thy spouse I bethought me.
                        There I thought pitifully,
                        Here I thought mournfully-
                        Uncut I leave thee,
                            o thou Mayumi tree
                                 For Adzusa bows! 2


  f   The asterisks represent an untranslatable pillow-\\'ord.   See Ch. K,
P·255-
  2 l\rlayumi is the Euonymus. Adzusa is the Catalpa, a tree suitable for
Inaking bows. It has no particular meaning here. There is much differ-
      J26                           NIHONGI.

          So he was buried at Mount Nara. Afterwards the Prince
       Imperial built a palace at Uji, wherein he dwelt. Moreover in
       consequence of his ceding the Dignity to Oho-sazaki no Mikoto,
       he remained for a long time without assuming the Imperial
       rank. Now three years passed during which the Imperial
       rank was vacant. Then there was a fisherman who brought a
       mat-basket of fresh fish, which he offered as a present at the
        Uji Palace. The Prince Imperial commanded the fisherman,
       saying :-" I am not the Emperor," and sent him away, telling
        him to present it at Naniha. Oho-sazaki no Mikoto also sent
       him away, telling him to present it at Vji. Hereupon the
       fisherman's mat-basket became putrid on his journeys back and
       forward. So he sent it away again and procured other fresh
       fish, which he presented, and which were declined as on t:he
       previous day. The fresh fish again became putrid. The
       fisherman was grieved at his frequent returning, so he flung
       awa)' the fresh fish and wept. Therefore the proverbial say-
       ing, "There is a fisherman who weeps on account of his own
       things," which had its origin in this.
          The Prince Imperial said :-" I know that the Prince, my
       elder brother, is not to be moved from his resolution. Why
       then should I prolong my life and give trouble to the Empire? "
       So he died by his own hand. Then Oho-sazaki no Mikoto,
       hearing of the Prince Imperial's death, was greatly shocked,
XI. 6. and hastening from Naniha arrived at the Palace of Uji. No\v
       three days had passed since the Prince Imperial's death. Oho-
       sazaki no Mikoto beat his breast, wept aloud, and knew not
       what to do. He loosed out his hair, and bestriding the corpse,
       called upon him thrice, saying :-" Oh, my younger brother,
       the Imperial Prince!" In course of time he came to life,
       raised himself up, and remained in a sitting posture. Here-
       upon Oho-sazaki no Mikoto addressed the Heir Apparent,
       sayi~g :-" Oh, what grief! Oh, what regret! Why didst
       thou pass away of thine own accord? If the dead had any

     ence of opinion among native commentators as to the meaning of this poem.
     It would seeln as if the Prince, having thrown his brother overboard, could
     hardly claim much credit for clemency. But probably this is a genuine
     ancient poem, which the author has inserted here \vithout much regard to
     fitness. The asterisks represent the untranslatable pillo\v-word Chihay-
     bito, an epithet of Uji.
                                KINTOKU.                                 J26

knowledge, what would the late Emperor think of me?" So
the Prince Imperial addressed the Prince his elder brother,
saying :-" It is the command of Heaven. Who may stay it ?
If I should go to the place where the Emperor is, I will tell
him of all the Prince, my elder brother's wisdom, and also of
my abdication. But the sage Prince must surely be fatigued
after the long and hurried journey which he undertook on
hearing of my death." So he presented to him the Imperial
Princess Yata,l his younger sister by the same mother, saying:-
"Though she is unworthy of thy nuptials, she may in some
small measure serve to be entered in the number of the side
Courts." So he lay down again in his coffin and died.
    Hereupon Oho-sazaki no Mikoto put on plain unbleached
garments and began mourning for him, and his lamentation
was exceedingly pathetic. He was buried on the top of the
hill of Uji.
    1st year, Spring, 1st month, 3rd day. Oho-sazaki no Mikoto A.D. 313-
assumed the Imperial Dignity. The Empress was honoured
with the title of Grand Empress. He made his capital at
Naniha. It was called the Palace of Takatsu. The Palace
enclosure and buildings were not plastered, the gable rafters XI. 7·
and ridgepoles, the posts and pillars were devoid of ornament;
the covering of thatch was not evenly trimmed. 2 This was
that he might not delay the season of agricultural operations
for the sake of his own personal caprices.
    Before this time, on the day that the Emperor was born, an
0\\,1 entered the parturition house.     The next morning the
Emperor Homuda called to him the Prime Minister Takechi
no Sukune, and addressed him, saying :-" What may this
portend?" The Prime Minister answered and said :-" I t is
a lucky omen. Moreover yesterday when thy servant's wife
was in labour, a wren entered the parturition house. This also
is strange!" Hereupon the Emperor said :-" Now our child
and the Prime Minister's child have been born on the same day.

   1 She was also a daughter of the late Emperor.    This shows that marriages
of SIsters by tkefatlter's side only were allo,,-ed. The Prince Imperial was
able to give his sister by the Inother's side in marriage. He would have
had no control over his sisters by the father's side only.
  ~ It should be remembered that at this period every Mikado built himself
a new palace in a ne,v locality.
        J26                              NIHONGI.

          In the case of both there are omens. This is an indication
          from Heaven. Let us take the names of these birds, and each
          exchanging them, call our children after them as a covenant
          to future generations." So he took the name "\vren" (sazaki)
          and called the Prince Imperial by it, saying :-" The Imperial
          Prince Oho-sazaki." 1 And he took the nanle " o\vl" (Dzuku)
          and called the Prime :Nlinister's child by it, saying :-" Dzuku
   XI. 8. no Sukune." He "vas the first ancestor of the Omi of Heguri.
             This )rear was the year ~Iidzunoto Tori (loth) of the Cycle.
A.D. 314.    2nd year, Spring, 3rd n10nth, 8th da:y. Iha no hime no Mikoto
          \vas appointed Empress. She was the mother of the Eluperor
          Ohi-ne 2 Iza-ho-,vake, of the Imperial Prince Suminohe no
          ~ akatsu, of the Emperor l\fidzu-ha-\vake, and of the Emperor
          v\To-asa-tsu-ma-,vaku-go no Sukune. Another consort, Kami-
          naga-hime of Hiuga, bore to him the Inlperial Prince Oho-
          kusaka and the Imperial Princess Hatahi.
A.D. 316.    4th year, Spring, 2nd month, 6th day. The Emperor
          addressed his ministers, sa)ring :-" We ascended a lofty to\ver
          and looked far and ,vide, but no smoke arose in the land..
          From this we gather that the people are poor, and that in the
          houses there are none cooking their rice. ,\re have heard that
          in the reigns of the ,vise sovereigns of antiquit:y, from ever:r
          one was heard the sound of songs hymning their virtue, in every
          house there was the ditty, ' Ho\v happy are we.' But no,,,
          when we observe the people, for three years past, no voice of
   XI. 9. eulogy is heard; the smoke of cooking has become rarer and
          rarer. By this we know that the five grains :l do not come up,
          and that the people are in extreme \vant. Even in the Home
          provinces 4 there are some who are not supplied; \vhat must it
           be in the provinces outside of our domain? "
             3rd month, 21st day. The follo\ving decree \vas issued:-

           J I have else\vhere suggested that the nanle of the Elnperor Oho-sazaki
        was a posthumous title given him o\ving to the great size of the 1110und
        (sasagi) under w'hich he is buried near Sakai. ..~nd although there is 111uch
        to be said on the other side, I am not sure that this Inay not after all be
        correct. The difference in spelling bet\veen sasag-i and sazaki is inl111aterial.
          2 Ohi-ne or Oho-ye means great-elder-brother.      It is hardly a natue.
          a Hemp, millet, rice, \vheat and barley, pulse.
          4 The territory round the capital ruled immediately by the Emperor.

        This is a Chinese phrase, not properly applicable to Japan at this period.
                              NINTOKU.                               279
                                                                     J26

"From this time forward, for the space of three years, let
forced labour be entirely abolished, and let the people have rest
from toil." From this day forth his robes of state and shoes
did not wear out, and none were made. The warm food and
hot broths did not become sour or putrid, and were not renewed.
He disciplined his heart and restrained his impulses so that he
discharged his functions without effort.
   Therefore the Palace enclosure fell to ruin and was not
rebuilt; the thatch decayed, and was not repaired; the wind
and rain entered by the chinks and soaked the coverlets; the
starlight filtered through the decayed places and exposed the
bed-mats. After this the wind and rain came in due season, 1
the five grains produced in abundance. For the space of three
autumns the people had plenty, the praises of his virtue filled
the land, and the smoke of cooking was also thick.                 x I. 10.
   7th year, Summer, 4th month, 1st day. The Emperor was A.D. 319.
on his tower, and looking far and ,vide, saw smoke arising
plentifully. On this day he addressed the Empress, saying:-
" We are now prosperous. What can there be to grieve for? "
The Empress answered and said :-" What dost thou mean by
prosperity?" The Emperor said :-" It is doubtless when the
smoke fills the land, and the people freely attain to wealth."
The Empress went on to say :-" The Palace enclosure is
crumbling down, and there are no means of repairing it; the
buildings are dilapidated so that the coverlets are exposed.
Can this be called prosperity?" The Emperor said :-" When
 Heaven establishes a Prince, it is for the sake of the people.
The Prince must therefore make the people the foundation.
 For this reason the wise sovereigns of antiquity, if a single one
 of their subjects was cold and starving, cast the responsibility
on themselves. Now the people's poverty is no other than
Our poverty; the people's prosperity is none other than Our
prosperity. There is no such thing as the people's being
prosperous and yet the Prince in poverty." 2

  1 The notion that the virtues of the Eluperor have a direct influence on

the weather is, of course, Chinese.
  ~ This whole episode is the C0111position of some one \vell acquainted
\vith Chinese literature. The sentiments are throughout characteristically
Chinese, and in several cases whole sentences are copied verbatiln fronl
Chinese \yorks.
                                                                u
        280
        J26                             NIlfONGI.

              Autumn, 8th month, 9th day. For the Imperial Prince
           Ohine Izaho-wake there was established the Mibu Be,l and
           again for the Empress there \vas established the Katsuraki
           Be. 2
             9th month. The provinces, without exception, petitioned,
           saying :-" Three years have now elapsed since forced labour
           was altogether remitted. The Palace buildings have therefore
           become decayed, and the Treasury empty. The black-headed
  XI. I I. people have now abundance, and remnants are not picked up.
           Therefore in the villages there are no men without wives or
           women without husbands, in the houses there is store of spare
           provisions. If at such a time there was no payment of taxes
           with which to repair the Palace buildings, we fear that we
           should incur guilt in the sight of Heaven." The Emperor,
           however, continued to be patient, and would not grant their
           petition.
A.D. 322.     loth year, Winter, loth month. Forced labour for the
           building of a Palace was imposed for the first time. Hereupon
           the people, without superintendence, supporting the aged and
           leading by the hand the young, transported timber, carried
           baskets 3 on their backs, and worked their hardest without
           distinction of night or day, vying with one another in the con-
           struction. In this manner, ere long the Palace buildings \vere
           everyone completed. Therefore up to the present day he is
           styled the Sage Emperor.
A.D. 323.     11th year, Summer, 4th month, 16th day.- The Emperor
           commanded his ministers, saying :-" Viewing this land, the
           moors and marshes extend far and wide, and the cultivated fields
           are few and rare. Moreover, the river waters spread out to each
           side, so that the lower streams flow sluggishly. Should there

            1 This Be is also called the Nibu Be.  There are several places in Japan
         of this name. It was originally the group of peasants \\'hose duty it \vas to
        provide wet nurses, etc., for infant princes. See Ch. K., p. 268, and l\loto-
        wori in " Kojikiden," xxxv. 12.
           2 The" Kojiki" says that these two Be were instituted as " Ini5dai " of
        the Prince and the Empress, i.e. in order to perpetuate their memory, the
        Be in such cases taking the narne of the person or of his or her residence.
        The last explanation might apply to the Empress, but it is not clear ho\v
        the name Mibu could perpetuate the menlory of this Prince.
           a Of earth.
                                 NINTOKU.                                J26

happen to be continuous rains, the tide from the sea flows up
ag-ainst them so that one may ride in boats through the
villages: and the highways, too, are covered with mud. There-
fore do ye our ministers examine this together, and having
ascertained the source of the divergence, make a channel for
them to the sea, and, staying the contrary flow (of the tide),
preserve the fields and houses."
   Winter, loth month. The plain north of the Palace was
excavated, and the water from the south diverted into the
Vlestern Sea. Therefore that water was called by the name
Hori-ye. 1
   Moreover, in order to prevent the overflowing of the Northern XI. 12.
river the Mamuta embankment was constructed. At this time
there were t\VO parts of the construction which gave way and
could not be stopped up. Then the Emperor had a dream in
which he \vas admonished by a God, saying :-" There is a man
of Musashi named Koha-kubi 2 and a man of Kahachi named
Rororno no ko,:l the Muraji of Mamuta. Let these two men be
sacrificed to the River-God, and thou wilt surel)' be enabled to
close the gaps." So he sought for these two men, and having
found them, sacrificed them to the River-God. Hereupon
Koha-kubi wept and lamented, and plunging into the water,
died. So that embankment was completed. Koromo no ko,
ho\vever, took two whole calabashes, and standing over the
water which could not be dammed, plunged the two calabashes
into the mid-stream and prayed, saying :-" a thou River-God,
who hast sent the curse (to remove which) I have now come
hither as a sacrifice. If thou dost persist in thy desire to have
me, sink these calabashes and let them not rise to the surface.
Then shall I know that thou art a true God, and will enter the
water of my own accord. But if thou canst not sink the cala-
bashes, I shall, of course, know that thou art a false God, for
whom, why should I spend my life in vain?" Hereupon a
whirlwind arose suddenly which drew with it the calabashes
and tried to submerge them in the water. But the calabashes,

  1 Excavated estuary, or canal.                     2 Strong-neck.

  3 Garment-child. These are personal names. Such names are in the
original put after titles, but I have reversed this order, in accordance \vith
European practice.
         J26                             NIHONGI.

           dancing on the \vaves, would not sink, and floated far a\yay
           over the wide \vaters. In this way that embankment \vas
           completed, although Koromo no ko did not die. Accordingly
  XI. 13. !{oromo no ko's cleverness saved his life. Therefore the men
           of that time gave a name to these two places, calling them
           " Kohakubi's Gap" and" !{oromo no ko's Gap."
              This year men of Silla came to the Court with tribute, and
           \vere made to labour at this public \\"ork.
A.D. 324.     12th year, Autumn, 7th month, 3rd day. The Land of
           !{Ofy"O sent tribute of iron shields and iron targets.
              8th month, loth day. The Koryo guests were entertained
           at Court. On this day the ministers and functionaries ,,,,ere
           assembled and made to shoot at the iron shields and targets
           presented by Koryo. Nobody could pierce the targets except
           Tatebito no Sukune, the ancestor of the Omi of Ikuba, l \",ho
           shot at the iron targets and pierced them. Then the guests
           from I{oryo, \vhen they saw this, were struck with awe b:y his
           excellent skill in archer)r, and, standing up together, did
           obeisance to the Emperor. The next day the Emperor com~
           Inended Tatebito no Sukune and gave him a title, calling him
           Ikuba no Toda no Sukune. On the same day a title "ras
           given to Sukune no Omi, the ancestor of the Mi)Takko of
           Ohase, and he ,vas called Sakashi-nokori 2 no Omi.
              Winter, loth month. The Great Canal was dug in the
           district of Kurikuma in Yamashiro for the irrigation of the rice . .
           fields. By this means the peasants of that district had al\va)?s
           years of abundance.
A.D. 32 5.    13th year, Autumn, 9th month. Now for the first tin1e
           official granaries were established at Mamuta. The U su-me:~
           Be was accordingly instituted.
              Winter, loth month. The Pond of Wani 4 was made. In
 XI. '14· the same month the Yokono Embankment was constructed.
A.D. 326 .    14th year, Winter, 11th month. A bridge was made at the
           Wikahi ferry. It was this place which was called \Vo-bashi.~
           In this year a highway was constructed and laid down \vithin
           the capital from the South Gate extending in a straight line as

             1 Tatebito means shield-Inan, and Ikuba, target.
             2 Clever-remainder.             3 Millers.         4   In Kahachi.
             5 Small-bridge.
                                 NINTOKU.                                  J26

far as the village of Tajihi. Moreover, a great canal was dug
in Konku 1 by which the water of the Ishikaha River was
brought to irrigate the four waste plains of Upper Suzuka and
Lower Suzuka, Upper Toyora and Lower Toyora. By bringing
these under cultivation there were gained more than 40,000
K'iiing 2 of rice-land. Therefore the peasants of those places
enjoyed abundance, and there was no longer the plague of bad
years.
  16th year, Autumn, 7th month, 1st day. The Emperor,
indicating Kuhada no Kugahime, a lady of the Palace, to his
personal attendants, said :-" It is our desire to bestow affection
on this damsel, but, harassed by the Empress's jealousy, \\"e have
not been able to become united to her. 11any years have XI. 15
passed. '\Thy should she waste her years of bloom?" So he
made a song, sa)ring : -
                  Who \vill nourish
                  The daughter of the Omi
                  That s\veeps along the bottonl of the water? 3

   Then Hayamachi, the ancestor of the Miyakko of the
provInce of Harima, advanced alone and made a song,
saying : -
                         I, Hayanlachi of Harinla,
                         (Where the dreadful tides are)
                         Though full of awe,
                         Like rocks tunlbling do\vn,
                         I \vill nourish her. 4

   That same day Kugahime was given to Hayamachi. On the
evening of the next day Hayamachi went to Kugahime's house.
Now Kugahime would not comply with his wishes, but he per-
sisted in approaching the curtained space. Then Kugahime

   1 In Kahachi.

   : A Chinese Ineasure of land equal to 100 rno, or more than fifteen English
acres. This exact number of K'iiing occurs in a Chinese book of the Han
period as the extent of land reclaimed by a similar operation.
   3 The last line is a makura kotoba not in the least suitable as an epithet

of Omi, a minister. But Omi is sOlnewhat like ami, a net, for \vhich it is
 satisfactory enough. The text is doubtful.
   4 This stanza is in the ordinary 3 1- syllable metre, and the previous one in

the same, minus the first t\VO lines. The second line is a makura kotoba.
        J26                              NIHOi'GI.

           said :-" Th:y handmaiden will end her )~ears husbandless.
           How can she become my Lord's \vife?" No\v the Emperor,
           when he heard this, wished to accomplish Ha)Tamachi's desires,
           so he sent Kugahime along \vith Ha:yamachi to Kuhada. But
           Kugahime straightway became ill and died on the journey.
           Therefore there is to this day the tomb of Kugahime.
A.I>. 329.    17th year. Silla did not attend the Court \vith tribute.
              Autumn, 9th month. Toda no Sukune, ancestor of the
           Omi of Ikuba, and Sakashi-nokori no Omi, ancestor of the
           Miyakko of Ohase, were sent to inquire the reason of the failure
           to send tribute. Hereupon the Silla people \\Tere afraid, and
  XI. 16. presented 1460 pieces of tribute, fine silks, and miscellaneous
           objects of all kinds-in all eighty ship-loads.
A.D. 334·     22nd year, Spring, 1st month. The Emperor addressed the
           Empress, saying :-" I have taken to me the Imperial Princess
           Yata, and am about to make her my concubine." But the
           Empress would not allow it. Hereupon the Emperor made
           a song, in which he besought the Empress, saying : -

                             As a nleans of raising up
                             Dear ones:
                             I.~S a spare bowstring
                             To supply a vacancy
                             I would place (her) aloT'\g with (thee).


           The Empress made a song in reply, saying : -

                             I n the case of garnlents
                             To double thenl is ,vell,
                             But my Lord \vho \vould set in a ro\v
                             The couches of night-
                             I wonder if he is ,vise.


           The Emperor again made a song, sa)~ing:-

                           Like the shore of N arabi 1
                           Of Cape N aniha
                           That projects (into the sea)
                           It must have been solely to be thy c0111rade
                           That that child came into being.


                -1   Narabi nleans to be associated ,vith, to be a companion.
                                NINTOKU.                              J26

  The Empress made a song in reply, saying : -
                        Like the summer insect,
                       The insect that seeks the fire
                       'AT earing double garments, l
                       That the palace precinct should be thus,
                        Nay! it is not good. 2                                x r. 17
  The Enlperor again made a song, saying : -
                       Even the traveller,
                       Who \vith unshared tears
                       Toils over the little pass of H ika
                       In Asatsulna 3 _
                       Well for him had he a companion!

  The Empress finally refused her consent. Therefore she
was silent, and answered not again.
  30th year, Autumn, 9th month, 11th day. The Empress A.D. 34 2 .
made an excursion to the land oi Kit She went as far as
Cape 4 Kumano, and was coming back with leaves of the mit-
suna,o which she had gathered there. On this day the Emperor,
espying the Empress's absence, wedded the Imperial Princess
Yata, and placed her in the Palace. Now the Empress, when
she arrived at the Naniha ferry, heard that the Emperor had
become united to the Imperial Princess Yata, and was very
wroth. She flung into the sea the mitsuna leaves which she
had gathered, and would not land. Wherefore the men of
that day called the sea where the leaves were scattered XI. 18.
Kashiha no Watari, or the Kashiha ferry. Now the Emperor,
unaware that the Empress was angry and would not land,
went in person to the Great Harbour,«s and while awaiting the
Empress's ship, made a song, saying:-

  1    Wings?                     2 The meaning is here sonlewhat doubtful.
  3    Asatsuma is the name of a mountain in Yamato. It means" morning-
wife."
  4  This is properly not a cape, but only a spur of a hill.
  i» In the original nlitsuna-kashiha. Kashiha is the Quercus dentata, a
kind of evergreen oak, the leaves of which were used as drinking-cups. But
this term was also applied to any leaves used for this purpose. Here the
leaves of another tree-the mitsuna-seem to be intended. Chamberlain
tnakes it the aralia. See Ch. K., pp. 248-273.
   6 No doubt Naniha or Osaka.
          286
          J26                             NIHONGI.

                              Yemen of N aniha,
                              Haul along the bell-(hung) ship,
                              Soaked as to your loins,
                              Haul along that ship.
                              Haul along the great august ship.

            Now the Empress did not anchor at the Great Harbour, but
          drew onwards again, and, ascending the river, went round by
          way of Yamashiro, in the direction of Yamato. 1 The next day
          the Emperor sent an attendant named Toriyama to bring the
          Empress back, and made a song, saying:-
                                In Yamashiro
                                Overtake her, Toriyama.
                                Overtake her, overtake her,
                                My beloved spouse-
                                I wonder wilt thou overtake and join her.

            The Empress would not come back, but continued her
          journey as far as the River of Yamashiro, where she made a
          song, sayIng:-
                                  Ascending the river-
                                  The River of Yamashiro -
                                  (Peak upon peak 2_)
                                  As I ascend it,
                                  By the river bend
                                  There stands luxuriant
                                  (Less-than-a-hundred) 3
                                  An eighty-leaved ,tree.
                                  Is it the Great Lord?

            So she crossed over Mount Nara, and looking on Katsuraki,
XI. 19.   she made a song, saying:-
                                  Going up to Nliya,4
                                  As I ascend



            1  ChI K., p. 276.
            2  Peak upon peak refers to yama, mountain, the first part of Yamashiro.
          It is a mere omalnental epithet.
            3 Less than a hundred is a makura-kotoba of eighty.    The luxuriant tree,
          with its plentiful foliage, reminds her of the Emperor.
            4 Miya is probably short for Takamiya in the last line of the poenl but

          one.
                                 NINTOKU.                                J26

                         The River of Yamashiro
                         (-Peak upon peak-)
                         Nara I pass
                         Of fertile soil ;
                         Yamato I pass,
                         Shielded by its mountains;
                         The land I long to see
                         Is Takamiya of Katsuraki,
                         For there is my home. l

   Returning again to Yamashiro, she built a Palace on the
south side of the Hill of Tsutsuki, and dwelt there.
   Winter, loth month, 1st day. Kuchi no Omi, ancestor of
the Omi of Ikuba, was sent to fetch the Empress.
        One version says :-" Kuchi no Omi, ancestor of the
     Omi of Wani."
   Now Kuchi no Omi went to the Palace of Tsutsuki, and
wished to have audience of the Empress, but she remained
silent and answered not. Then Kuchi no Omi prostrated him-
self before the Empress's hall, and remained there day and
night drenched by the rain and sno\\', and did not move.
Hereupon Kuchi no Omi's younger sister, Kuniyori-hime, who
was in the service of the Empress, and happened just then to
be in attendance upon her, saw her elder brother wet with the
rain, and shed tears and made a song, saying :-
                          In the Palace of Tsutsuki,
                          In Yamashiro,
                          \Vhen I see my elder brother
                          Delivering his message,
                           My eyes fill ,vith tears.

   Then the Empress addressed Kuniyori-hime, saying:-
"Why weepest thou?" She answered and said :-" He that
lies prostrate in the courtyard and begs an audience is thy
handmaiden's elder brother. He is wet with the rain, and XI. 20.
does not flinch, but still lies prostrate in the hope of an audi-
ence of thee. This is why I weep and am sorrowful." Then
the Empress addressed her, saying :-" Tell thy elder brother
to return with all speed. I will never go back."           Kuchi
 accordingly returned, and made his report to the Emperor.
   11th month, 7th day. The Emperor made a progress by
 1   Much of this poem is of doubtful interpretation.   Compare Ch. K. P.275.
 288
 J26                                NIHONGI.

 river to Yamashiro. At this time there was a mulberry branch
 floating down the stream. The Emperor looked at the mul-
 berry branch, and made a song, saying : -
                        The mulberry tree 1
                          *     •     :Ie   •
                        Which Iha 2 no hitne
                        \\Till not listen to even absently
                        May not reach (the bank),
                        But by the bends of the river
                         It seems to go tossing on-
                        Oh ! that mulberry tree!

   On the next day the Imperial cortege arrived at the Palace
 of Tsutsuki. The Empress was sent for, but she refused to
 appear before the Emperor. Then the Emperor made a song,
 sayIng : -
                       Like the radishes 3 dug up
                       With the wooden hoes
                       Of the women of Yanlashiro
                       (Peak upon peak),
                        f Purely, purely,
                        (. Clamorously, clamorously,
                       Because thou hast spoken
                       I have come hither
                       Like the flourishing trees
                       Which I look over at.

    1 Mulberry is ura-kuha.   In modern Japanese kuha alone nleans mulberry.
  U ra also means heart, and as koha nleans hard, there seems an allusion
  to the Empress's hard-heartedness.
    The Emperor compares his condition to that of the mulberry branch
 drifting down the stream, and finding no rest anywhere. The metre is
 irregular.
    2 Iha means rock.     It has here a makura-kotoba prefixed to it, viz.
 tsuno-sahafu, creeper-clad, \\~hich is inappropriate to Iha, when taken as the
 Empress's name, though suitable to it in its original meaning.
    S Radishes are at this day a staple food of the Japanese.    When freshly
 washed they look very white and clean. The first four lines are a luere
 introduction to saba-saba, i.e. purely, and the author immediately goes on
 to exchange this meaning for another meaning of the same word, viz.,
.clamorou'Sly, by a play of words common in Japanese poetry. The only
 bond of connection between the first and second halves of the poem is this
 double sense of saha-saha. "The flourishing trees" represent the Em-
 peror's brilliant suite. The interpretation of this poeln is more or less
 conjectural. Compare Ch. K., p. 279.
                               NINTOKU.                              J26

Again he made a song, saying:-                                              XI. 21.

               Had I not had for my pillo\v
               Thine arm
               White as the whiteness of the roots
               Of the radishes dug up
               With the ,vooden hoes
               Of the won1en of Yamashiro
               (Peak upon peak),
               Then Inightest thou say that thou kno\\'est me not.

   Then the Empress sent a message to the Emperor, saying:
- " My lord has taken the Imperial Princess Yata and made
her his concubine. Now I do not wish to be associated with the
 Princess as Consort." So she refused to enter his presence,
and the Imperial carriage returned to the Palace. The Em-
peror hereupon resented the Empress's great indignation, but
yet continued to love her.
   3 1st year, Spring, 1st month, 15th day. Ohine-izaho-\vake A.D. 343.
no Mikoto was appointed Prince Imperial.
   35 th year, Summer, 6th month. The Empress Iha no hime A.n. 347.
no Mikoto died in the Palace of Tsutsuki.
   37th year, Winter, 11th month, 12th day. The Empress A.D. 349.
,vas buried on 1'Iount N ara.
   38th year, Spring, 1st month, 6th day. The Imperial Princess A.D. 350.
Yata was appointed Empress.
   Autumn, 7th month. The Emperor and Ernpress dwelt in
a high tower to escape from the heat. At this time there was
heard every night from the moor of Toga the cry of deer with
a musical, yet melancholy sound, so that a feeling of pity arose
in them both. But when the interlune came, the cry of the deer Xl. 22.
was no longer heard. Hereupon the Emperor addressed the
Empress, saying :-" This evening the deer does not bell.
Wherefore is this?" "The next day, a Saheki Be of the
district of Wina presented a basket. The Emperor caused a
steward to make inquiry of him, saying :-" \Vhat is this
basket?" The answer was, "A buck." He inquired-" A
deer of what place?" and was told, "Of Toga moor." The
Emperor considered that this basket 1 must be the deer which

   1 The basket is put for the contents (like the Latin sportula) and the

\\'ord is used eyen \\-"hen there may have been no basket at all.
         J26                            NIHONGI.

            had belled, and he accordingly addressed the Empress, saying:
            -" We have been soothed in the anxious thoughts which have
           -of late possessed us by listening to the belling of a deer. Now
            \vhen the day or night, and the mountain or moor of the
           ·deer which has been caught are considered, they correspond
            to the deer which belled. It is true that that man \vas
            not aware of our feelings of affection, and that it was by
           ·chance that he came to take it. We nevertheless cannot
            resist a feeling of resentment. It is therefore our wish that
            the Saheki Be shall not approach the Imperial Palace."
            So he made the officials remove his residence to N uta in
           Aki. He was the ancestor of the present Saheki Be of Nuta
           in Aki.
              There is a popular story that a long time ago there "vas a
            man who went to Toga, and spent the night on the moor.
            Now there were two deer which lay down beside him. When
           it was on the point of cock-crow, the male deer addressed the
           female, saying :-" This night I had a dream in which I saw
           a white mist come down copiously and cover my body. What
  XI. 23. may this portend?" The female deer answered and said:-
            " If thou goest out, thou wilt certainly be shot by men and die,
            and so thy body will be smeared with \\l'hite salt to correspond
           with the whiteness of the mist." Now the man who was
           spending the night there wondered at this in his heart. Before
           it was yet dawn, there came a hunter, who shot the male deer,
           and killed it. Hence the proverbial saying of the men of that
           day-" Even the belling male deer follows the interpretation
           of a dream."
.A.D. 35 2    40th year, Spring, 3rd month. The Emperor wished to take
           to himself the Imperial Princess Medori 1 as concubine, and
           made the Imperial Prince Hayabusa wake 2 his middle man.
            Now the Imperial Prince Hayabusa secretly wedded her him-
           self, and for a long tiole made no report of his mission. Here-
            upon the Emperor, not knowing that she had a husband, went
            in person to the Imperial Princess Medori's chamber. At

          1 Princess Medori was half-sister of the Emperor by a different mother, and

        full sister of the Empress.
          I Hayabusa wake was half-brother to both Princess Medori and the

        Emperor by a different mother.
                                NINTOKU.                                 J26

this time the Imperial Princess was weaving, and her women
made a song, saying:-
                      The metal 100111 of Heaven-
                      The e\~erlasting-l
                      The metal-Ioonl \vhere
                      :\ledori is weaving
                      Stuff for an august cloak
                      For Hayabusa ,,'ake ~

    Upon this the Emperor saw that the Imperial Prince Haya-
busa wake had secretly wedded her, and was angry. But out XI. 24·
-of regard for what the Elnpress might say, and also from
respect for the principle which governs the relation of stem
and branches,2 he was patient and did not punish him. Now
the Imperial Prince Hayabusa wake was lying down for a
 little with his head pillowed on the Imperial Princess's knee.
Whereupon he addressed her, saying :-" Which is the swiftest,
the wren or the falcon?" 3 She said, "The falcon." Then
the Imperial Prince said :-" That means that I shall be
first." The Emperor heard these words, and his wrath was
aroused again. At this time the Imperial Prince Hayabusa
wake's attendants made a song, saying :-
                         The falcon
                         Ascending to Heaven
                         With soaring flight-
                         Let him seize the ,vren
                         On the top of the rrsuki trees.4
  When the Emperor heard this song, he flew into a great
rage, and said :-" We were unwilling for a private cause of
hate to destroy one related to us, and we were patient. Why
should a private cause of quarrel be converted into a matter
which affects the State? "
  So he wished to kill the Imperial Prince Hayabusa wake.

   1 The \vord translated everlasting is hisakata, lit. long-hard, an epithet

involving a similar conception of the sky to our word "firmament." By
metal is probably meant" adorned with metal fittings."
   2 i.e. the head of the family and the junior menlbers.

   3 Hayabusa means "falcon."

   4 In the original itsuki or idzuki.  This the commentators explain as fifty
(i) tsuki trees. But how \vould "sacred (idzu) tree" do-in allusion to the
Emperor's rank?
       J26                         NIHONGI.

        Now the Imperial Prince fled with the Imperial Princess Medori,
        intending to place her in the Shrine of Ise. Hereupon the
        Emperor, hearing that the Imperial Prince Hayabusa ,vake had
        run away, straight\vay sent Wofuna of the Honchi Be of Kibi
XI. 25. and Aganoko, Atahe of Saheki in Harima, saying :-" Pursue
        them, and when you overtake them, sla:y them forthv-'ith." Here-
        upon the Empress addressed the Emperor, saying :-" Truly
        the Imperial Princess Medori is liable to severe punishment.
        But ,,,hen she is killed I hope her body rna}' not be exposed."
        Accordingly he gave orders to Wofuna and his colleague not
        to take the Imperial Princess's leg-je\vels or arm-jev{els. \Vo-
        funa and his colleague pursued them as far as Uda, and closed
        on them at Mount Soni. Here they hid in the herbage, and
        escaping by only a little, fled hastil)T, and crossed the moun-
        tain. Then the Imperial Prince made a song, saying:-
                          Even this mountain, steep
                          As a ladder,
                          \Vhen I cross over it
                          \Vith thee, Iny love,
                          Seems a restful couch.

           Hereupon Wofuna and the rest, seeing that they had escaped,
        followed after hastily, and when the:y came to the moor of
        Komoshiro in Ise, sle\v them. Then '" ofuna and the others
        searched for the Imperial Princess's jewels, and took them
        from within her undergarments. So they buried the bodies of
        the Prince and Princess on the bank of the River Ihoki, and
        then made their report to the Emperor. The Empress caused
        inquiry to be made of Wofuna and the others, sa~ying :-" Did
        you see the Imperial Princess's je\vels?" They ans\vered and
        said, "\Ve did not see them."
           That year during the month 1 of the festival of tasting the
        first rice on the day" of the banquet, sake was given to the
        princesses and ladies of the inner and outer circle. Thereupon,
Xl. 26. on the hands of two women, viz., the wife of Waka-mori-yama,
        Kimi of the mountains of Afumi, and Ihasakihime, one of the
        Uneme,~ there were entwined excellent je¥lels. The Empress,

         1 The 11th Inonth.
         'JProbably for yone-lue, i.e. rice-woluan, wonlen attendants of the
       palace. They were selected for their good looks.
                                NINTOKU.                               293
observing that these jewels resembled those of the Imperial
Princess Medori, straightway becanle suspicious, and com-
manded an official to inquire under what circumstances they
had come by these jewelC',. They answered and said :-" They
are the je\vels of the wife of Aganoko, the Atahe of Saheki."
So Aganoko, being interrogated, answered and said :-" On
the day that the Imperial Princess was put to death I searched
her and took them:' So they \\rere about to put Aganoko to
death. But he offered to the Emperor all his private lands,
and prayed to escape from death. Therefore his land was
confiscated, and the death penalty remitted. On this account
that land \vas called Tama-de. 1
   41st year, Spring, 3rd month. Ki no Tsuna no Sukune ,vas A.D. 353.
sent to pekche. He \vas the first to distinguish the boundaries
of provinces and districts, and to commit to \vriting in detail
the productions of the soil in each locality. At this time Lord
Chyu,2 the grandson of the King of Pekche, was disrespectful,
and accordingly Ki no Tsuno no ,ukune remonstrated with XI. 27.
the King of pekche. The King Jf Pekche was afraid, and
binding Lord Chyu in iron chaip " delivered him up in charge
of Sotsuhiko. Now Lord Ch (I, when he came to Japan,
straight\vay ran awa.y, and cor .;ealed himself in the house of
Koroshi, Obito of Nishikori in Ishikaha, deceiving him by
saying: -" The Empress has pardoned thy servant's offence.
Therefore have I betaken myself to thee for maintenance." A
long time after the Emperor ultimately forgave him his
offence. 3
   43rd :year, Autumn, 9th month, 1st day. Tsuchigura, Ahiko A.D. 355.

  1   i.e. the pricc of jc\vels.
  S   The original has ii, l.c. sake. Chyu is the Coreall pronunciation, but
it is doubtful ,vhat his natnc really ,vas.
   3 We are told above, p. 256, A.D. 272 of the ~, Nihongi" Chronology, that

King Sinsa of Pekche ,\·as disrespectful, and that Ki no 'Tsuno no Sukune
and others were sent to call hiln to an account. At p. 257, A.D. 277, we
hear of King Ahwa being disrespectful, and a Pekch~ Prince being sent to
Japan as a hostage in consequence. Sotsuhiko is a nalne which has already
occurred (p. 242, A.D. 205 of the" Nihongi " Chronology) in connection \vith
Corean nlatters. But, as shown above (p. 256), King Sinsa really died in
39 2 , and was succeeded by Ah,va. I strongly suspect that ,\'e have in
the present passage only another version of the same incident, and that
all three versions are 111uch antedated.
         294
         J26                             NIHONGI.

           of Yosami, caught a strange bird and presented it to the
           Emperor, sa:ying :-" I am constantly spreading nets and
           catching birds in thenl, but never before have I caught a bird
           of this kind. I therefore thought it curious, and offer it to His
           Majesty." The Emperor sent for Lord Chyu and, pointing to the
           bird, said :-" What bird is this?" Lord Chyu answered and
           said :-" Birds of this kind are numerous in pekche. They can
           be tamed so as to be quite obedient to man. Moreover the~y are
           swift of flight and prey' upon all kinds of birds. The common
           people in Pekche call theln Kuchi." So it was given to Lord
           Chyu to be fed and tamed. In no long time he succeeded in
           taming it. Lord Ch)'u accordingly fastened to its leg a soft
           leather strap, and attached to its tail a snlall bell. l Then,
           placing it on his forearm, he presented it to the Emperor. On
           this day he went to the moor of Mozu and hunted. At this
  XI. 28. time a large number of hen pheasants got up, and the falcon ~
           was let loose and made to catch them. I t speedily caught
           several tens of pheasants. In this month the Be of Taka-ama
           (falcon-sweet) was first established. Therefore the men of that
           time called the place \vhere the falcon was brought up the
           village of Taka-ama.
A.D. 362 .    50th year, Spring, 3 rd month, 5th day. A man of Kahachi
           informed the Emperor, saying :-" A wild goose has laid an egg
           on the Mamuta embankment." That same day a messenger was
           sent to see. He said :-" It is true." The Emperor hereupon
           made a song, in \vhich he inquired of Takechi no Sukune,
           saying:-
                            o Aso of Uchi !
                            *     *       *         *3
                            Thou, beyond all others,-\
                            A man distant of age-
                                                                - ------   -- - - -   ----

           1 Fr. grelot.
          2  The taka or gosha\\·k. The hayabusa mentioned above is a slnaller
        bird, probably the peregrine falcon. The best ha\vks for hunting ,,,,ere
        fonnerly imported to Japan froln Corea.
           3 An untranslatable makura-kotoba cOlnes in here.

           4 Takechi no Sukune's death is not Inentioned in the" Nihongi.';     A later
        authority says that he died in this year, having held office for 240 years, and
        lived 295 (or 299) years. Another authority states that he died in the 55th
        year of Nintoku Tenno, at the age of 280. Still another says that he died in
                                   NIl'TOKU.                                295
                     Thou, beyond all others,
                     A man long in the land--
                     Hast thou not heard
                     That a ,vild goose has laid an egg
                     In Akitsushinla,
                     The land ot Yalnato ? 1

   Takechi no Sukune made a song in repl~y, saying : -
                     Our great Lord
                     \\lho rules tranquilly,
                     Right is he, right is he
                      To ask me.
                     For in Akitsushima,
                     In the land of Yan1ato,
                     N ever have I heard
                     'I'hat a \vild goose has laid an egg.

   53rd year. Silla did not attend the Court with tribute.          A.D. 365-
                                                                    XI. 29..
   5th month. Takahase, ancestor of the Kimi of K()dzuke, was
sent to ask the reason of the failure to send tribute. On his
way he took a white deer, and returning with it, presented it to
the Emperor. He then chose another day and started on his
journey. Shortly after, the Emperor sent in addition Taka-
base's younger brother Tamichi, and commanded him, saying:-
" If Silla is recalcitrant, raise an army and invade that land.                 q




So he gave him chosen troops. Silla raised an army and made
opposition. Now the Silla men offered battle daily. But
Tamichi made strong his barriers, and would not go out. Now
a Silla soldier who had been let out from the camp was taken
prisoner. So being questioned as to the condition of affairs, he
answered, saying :-" There are mighty men, called the 'Hun-
dred Thrusters,' 2 nimble and valorous, who always form the
right van of the army. Therefore if you observe this and
attack the left, it \vill be routed." Now Silla allowed the left to

the 78th year of Nintoku Tenno's reign, \vhich, as one account says that he
was born in the 9th year of Keiko Tenno, would make him 312 years of age
at his death. I t has been suggested that there were several persons of this
name ,vho succeeded each other as hereditary prime ministers. But the
simpler explanation is that the chronology at this period is \\pildly inaccurate,
as there is plenty of other evidence to sho\\'.
   1 See eh. K., p. 283.  Wild geese do not nest in Japan.
   2 It nlay be only one man of this name.

                                                                      x
         J26                              NIHONGI.

          be vacant, and filled up the numbers of the right. Hereupon
          Tamichi, dra\ving up his picked cavalry, 1 attacked their left,
 XI. 30. upon which the Silla troops were defeated. Accordingly letting
          go his men, he bore down on the enemy and sle,v several hun-
          dreds of them. So he took prisoners the people of four villages,
          with ,vhorn he returned to Japan. 2
A.D. 367-    55th :year. The Yemishi rebelled. Tamichi was sent to
          attack them. He ,vas ,vorsted by the Yemishi, and slain at the
          Harbour of Ishimi. 3 No,v one of his followers obtained
          Tamichi's armlet and gave it to his wife, who embraced the
          armlet and strangled herself. When the men of that time
          heard of this they shed tears. After this the Yemishi again
          made an incursion and carried off some of the people. Accord-
          ingly they dug up Tamichi's tomb, upon which a great serpent
          started up with glaring eyes, and came o_ut of the tomb. It bit
          the Yemishi, ,vho were everyone affected by the serpent's poison,
          so that many of them died, and only one or two escaped.
          Therefore the m~n of that time said: "Although dead, Tamichi
          at last had his revenge. How can it be said that the dead have
          no knowledge? "
A.D. 370.    58th year, Summer, 5th month. By the road which passes
          to the south of the grove of firs at Arehaka," there suddenl)·
          sprang up two kunugi 5 trees, which joined over the road so that
          the ends of their branches met.
             Winter, loth month. The Land of \\Tu and the Land of
           Koryo together attended the Court with tribute. 6
A.D. 372.    60th year, Winter, loth month. The guardians of the


            1 I do not regard this as any proof that the Japanese had cavalry at this

         time. The author is, I think, only using a Chinese phrase which suggested
         itself to his melnory.
            2 The "Tongkam" mentions descents by Japanese in 440 in which a

         nUlnber of Coreans \vere carried off:
            3 In Kadzusa.     This is the traditional kana for fjt    -t:.    How the last
         character caine to be read . '. i/tz"ni is not clear.
            4 Arehaka n1eans ruined tumulus.          The well·kno\vn teluple of Tenn6ji at
         Osaka nO\\7 stands here.
            ft Quercus serrata, Hepburn.

            6 It is not to be supposed that China or even Koryo ever sent" tribute"

         to Japan. Presents were no doubt exchanged, \vhich both sides very likely
         represented to their subjects as "tribute."
                                NIXTOKU.                                 297
Shiratori misasagi 1 \vere told off as labourers on the public
works. N O\V the Emperor approached the place of the works.
Hereupon 1feki, one of the guardians of the misasagi, became
suddenly' changed into a \vhite deer, and ran away. Upon this
the Emperor commanded, saying :-" This misasagi has always XI. 31.
been empty, and therefore I meant to abolish its guardians and
for the first time to employ them as labourers. But now that I
see this portent, I am filled with profound awe. Let not the
guardians of the misasagi be disturbed." So he gave them to
the Hashi no Muraji. 2
   62nd year, Summer, 5th month. The Governor:i of the A.D. 374.
province of T()tomi presented a memorial, saying :-" There is
a great tree which has floated down the Ohowigaha until it was
stopped in a bend of the river. It is ten girths"' in size. It has
one stem which divides into two at the extremity." Now
Akoko, Atahe of Yamato, was sent to make a boat of it. He
conveyed it by \\"ay of the Southern Sea, and brought it to the
Harbour of Naniha, \\There it \vas enrolled among the number
of the Imperial vessels.
   This year the Imperial Prince Nukada no Ohonakatsu hiko
hunted in Tsuke. Now the Imperial Prince, looking down over
the moor from a mountain-top, espied something in shape like
a hut. So he sent a messenger to look at it. The messenger
returned and said :-" It is a muro." Accordingly he sent for
Ohoyama-nushi, the Inaki of Tsuke, and inquired of him,
saying :-" That thing which is on the moor-what kind of
muro is it?" He informed him, saying:-" It is an ice-muro."
The Imperial Prince said :-" How is the ice stored? Moreover,
for what is it used?" He said :-" The ground is excavated
to a depth of over ten feet. The top is then covered with a
roof of thatch. A thick layer of reed grass is then spread, upon XI. 32.
which the ice is laid. The months of summer have passed and
yet it has not melted. As to its use-when the hot months

  I  The tomb, or rather cenotaph, of Yalnato dake.
  2  Who \\'ere charged "9ith lnatters connected with the luisasagi. Se
above, p. I HI.
   3 Provincial governors (I PJ are no\v nlentioned for the first time.
   4 The character rendered "girth i' is  11,   \\'hich is a measure of half a
cubit according to some, of three feet by others. HO\\'ever, a ten-girth tree
is merely a loose expression for a larg-e tree.
         J26                            NIHONGI.

          come it is placed in water or sake and thus used." The
          Imperial Prince straightway brought some of that ice, and
          presented it to the Palace. The Emperor was delighted with
          it, and from that time forward it became the rule always to store
          up ice from the last month of winter until the second month of
          spring when the ice melts.
A.D. 377·     65th year. In the province of Hida there was a man called
          Sukuna, who was so formed that on one trunk he had two faces.
          The faces were turned away from each other. The crowns
          met, and there was no nape of the neck. Each had hands and
          feet. There were knees, but no popliteal spaces or heels.
  XI. 33. He was strong and nimble. He carried swords on his right
          and on his left side, and used bow and arrow with all four
          hands at once. On this account he was disobedient to the
          Imperial command, and took a pleasure in plundering the
          people. Hereupon the Emperor sent N aniha-neko Take-
          furu-kuma, ancestor of the Omi of Wani, who put him to
          death.
A.D. 379.     67th year, Winter, loth month, 5th day. The Enlperor
          made a progress to the plain of Ishitsu in Kahachi, where he
          fixed upon a site for a misasagi.
              18th day. The building of the misasagi was commenced.
          On this day there was a deer which suddenl~y got up in the
          moor and ran in among the labourers, where it lay down and
          died. Now, its sudden death appearing strange, they looked
          to see where it was hurt, upon which a shrike came out
          of its ear and flew away. Accordingly they looked into its
          ear, and found that the skin was all bitten off. So this was
          the reason why they called that place the plain of Mozu no
          mimi. l
              This year, at a fork of the River Kahashima, in the central
          division of the Province of Kibi, there was a great water-snake
          which harassed the people. Now when travellers were passing
          that place on their journey, they were surely affected by its
          poison, so that many died. Hereupon Agata-mori,2 the ances-

          1 Shrike-ear. This plain lies inland frOln Sakai, near Osaka. The
        luisasagi is still intact, and: is, perhaps, the largest of its kind in Japan.
        Richiu rfenno and Hanzei Tenno are buried one on each side of Nintoku.
          : District.. \\'arden.
                               NINTOKU.                               299
tor of the Omi of Kasa, a man of fierce temper and of great
bodily strength, stood over the pool of the river-fork and flung
into the water three ,vhole calabashes, saying :-" Thou art XI. 34·
continually belching up poison and therewithal plaguing
travellers. I will kill thee, thou water-snake. If thou canst
sink these calabashes, then will I take myself away, but if thou
canst not sink them, then ,viII I cut up thy body." Now
the water-snake changed itself into a deer and tried to
draw down the calabashes, but the calabashes would not
sink. So with upraised s,vord he entered the ,vater and
sle\\r the water-snake. He further sought out the water-
snake's fellows. No\\" the tribe of all the water-snakes
filled a cave in the bottom of the pool. He slew them
everyone, and the water of the river became changed to
blood. Therefore that ,vater was called "The pool of Agata..
mori." 1
    At this time pestilential \"apours arose more and more, and
there \vere one or t\VO cases of rebellion. Hereupon:: the
 Emperor, rising earl)T in the morning and going to bed (late)
at night, lightened the taxes, reduced the imposts, and so \vas
generous to the people. He dispensed virtue and practised
kindness, therewithal encouraging the indigent. He showed
sympathy for the dead, and inquired after the sick, providing
for the orphan and the widow. In this way the decrees of his
Government were diffused into wide operation, and the Empire
was at peace, so that for over twenty years nothing untoward
happened.
    87th year, Spring, 1st month, 16th day. The Emperor A.D. 399.
 died.

   1 The traditional kana rendering   of the Chinese character translated
"water-snake" is midzuchi. Midzu is water, and chi a honorific term mean-
ing " elder." Midzuchi means indifferently water-snake or water-god, the
t\VO ideas being intiolately associated in the Japanese mind.    Dennys, in
his" Folk Lore of China," quotes from the North China Herald as fol..
lows :-" The River-God is in every case (where the ,vaters of inundations
were abated by them) a small water-snake, which popular fancy has con-
verted into a deity." The poisonous breath of serpents is an article of
 popular faith in many countries.
   I From" Hereupon" do\\"n to " operation" is taken alnl0st verbatinl froln
a Chinese book.
3°0                              NIliONGI.

  Winter, loth month, 7th day.              He \vas buried in the tnisa-
sagi on Mozu moor. l

   1 The Emperor's age is not given here.   The" Kojiki ,~ 1l1akes hitn eighty-
three years of age at his death. Others say 110. But if \ve allow hiJn to
have been at least sixteen ,,,hen he fell in love with Kami-naga-hime (see
above, p. :259) in A.D. 282, he cannot have been less than 13:2 at the time of
his death.
                            BOOK XII.

                   THE EMPEROR IZA-HO-WAKE.


                       (RICHIUl TENNO.)

THE Emperor     Iza-ho-wake was the eldest son of the Emperor
Ohosazaki. His mother's name was Iha no hime no Mikoto.
She was the daughter of Katsuraki no Sotsuhiko. He was
made Prince Imperial in Spring, the 1st month of the 31st year
of the reign of the Emperor Ohosazaki. He was then fifteen
years of age. The Emperor Ohosazaki died in Spring, the 1st
month of the 87th year of his reign.
   After the period of mourning, and in the interval before he
assumed the exalted Dignity, he wished to take Kurohime,~
the daughter of the Rata no Yashiro no Sukune, to him as
concubine. The wedding presents 3 having been already given,
he sent the Imperial Prince Nakatsu of Suminoye to give
notice of the lucky day. Now Prince Nakatsu having assumed
the elder Prince's narne, by this means seduced Kurohime.
On this night the Imperial Prince Nakatsu· came away, having
forgotten his wrist-bells in Kurohime's house. On the follow-
ing night, the Heir to the Throne, not knowing that the
 Imperial Prince Nakatsu had himself seduced her, went there.
 He entered the chamber, drew aside the curtain, and sat down
 upOl) the jewel-couch. Then there was a sound of bells at the
 head of the couch. The Heir wondering at this, inquired of XII. 2.

    That is, " He \\pho treads in the middle" (the right path).
      J

  I Black lady.                      I Probably a trait of Chinese manners.

  • Nakatsu Ineans "of the middle," tsu in this and sinlilar words being the
genitive particle.
       3°2                        NIHONGI.

         I(urohime, saying :-" What bells are these?" She answered
        and said :-" Are they not the bells which thou didst bring last
        night? Wherefore dost thou ask thy~ handmaiden any more
        about them?" The Heir naturally concluded that the Im-
        perial Prince Nakatsu had assumed his name and by this
        means seduced Kurohime, so he retired in silence.
           N ow the Imperial Prince Nakatsu, fearing that trouble would
        come of this, was about to kill the Heir to the Throne, and
        secretly raising a force, surrounded his Palace. Then Heguri
        no Tsuka no Sukune, Mononobe no Ohomahe no Sukune, and
        Achi no Omi, the ancestor of the A~ya no Atahe, these three
        men, gave information to the Heir, but he would not believe
        them.
                One version says :-" The Heir ,vas drunk and would
              not get up."
        Therefore the three men assisted the Heir, and nlaking him
        mount on horseback, caused him to escape.
                One accouQt says :-" Ohomahe no Sukune took the
              Heir to the Throne in his arms and mounted him on a
              horse."
        The Imperial Prince Nakatsu, not kno\ving that he was absent,
        set fire to his Palace. The fire lasted all night without being
        extinguished. When the Heir arrived at the Hanifu Hill in
        the Province of Kahachi he became sober, and looking back to
        Naniha, he saw the blaze of fire. He was greatly alarmed, and
        fled hastily by way of Ohosaka in the direction of Yamato.
XII. 3. When he got as far as Mount Asuka, he met a girl at the
        entrance of the mountain, of whom he inquired, saying:-
        "Are there any men on this mountain?" She answered and
        said :-" This mountain is full of many armed men. Thou
        hadst better go round and cross over by the Tagima road."
        Hereupon the Heir thQught to himself :-" By listening to the
        words of this girl I have been enabled to escape calamit:y." So
        he made a song, saying : -


                           At Ohosaka,
                           The girl that I Inet-
                           When I asked her the way,
                           She said not, .e right on,"
                           She said, "Tagima way."
                                  RICHIU.                                3 0~
                                                                         "   "
   So he turned aside again, and having raised the troops of
that district, made them follow him, and crossed over by way
 of ~tJount Tatsuta. At this time several tens of armed men
 came in pursuit of him. The Heir, looking at them from a
distance, said :-" Who are those men who are coming? And
why is their pace so hurried? Can they be an enemy?"
Accordingly they hid themselves on the mountain, and \vaited.
When they approached, one man was sent to inquire of them,
saying :-" What men are ye, and whither go ye?" They
ans\vered and said :-" We are fishermen of Nojima in Ahaji. XII. 4·
Hamako, the Muraji of Adzumi,l on behalf of the Imperial
Prince Nakatsu [One account says Sato-tomo, Muraji of
Adzumi~ , has sent us in pursuit of the Heir to the Throne."
Hereupon he brought out the troops which were in ambush,
and surrounding them, captured 2 them everyone. At this time
Akoko, the Atahe of Yanlato, who from the first had loved
Prince Nakatsu, and was privy to his conspiracy, secretly
assembled choice troops to the number of several hundred at
Kurusu in Kakibami, and on behalf of. Prince Nakatsu with-
stood the Heir. Now the Heir, not knowing that he \vas
beset with troops, went out for several ri from the mountain.
He was stopped by a large force of armed men, and was unable
to advance. So he sent a messenger and inquired of them,
saying :-" What men are ye ?" They answered and said:-
" Akoko, Atahe of Yamato." And in their turn they questioned
the messenger, saying :-" Who has sent thee?" He said : -
"The Prince Imperial has sent me." Then Akoko, fearing
lest there might be a numerous army there, said to the mes-
senger :-" Information has reached me that something unusual
has happened to the Prince Imperial, and in order to assist
him I am waiting upon him with this force that I have pre-
pared." The Heir, however, doubted his intentions, and tried
to kill him. Whereupon Akoko was afraid, and offering as a
present his own younger sister Hinohime,3 through her begged
that his capital offence might be pardoned. He was pardoned

   1 See above, p. 25 6, ,vhere his ancestor was n1ade prefect of the fisher-

lllen.
   2 As usual, "captured" stands for" slew."

   3 The Princess of the Sun.
       J26                          NIIIONGI.

          accordingly. It \vas prolably at this time that the custom
          began of the Atahe of Yamato sending tribute of ladies of the
          Palace.·
            The Heir took up his abode in the shrine of Furu no Iso no
          Kami. Hereupon the Imperial Prince ~fidzuha wake, discover-
          ing the absence of the Heir, sought him out and follo\ved him.
         The Heir, however, suspected the intentions of the Prince, his
         Y'ounger brother, and \\Tould not send for him. Then the
          Imperial Prince Midzuha \vake sent a message to the Heir,
         saying :-" Thy servant has not a black heart. Only, distressed
         at the absence of the Heir, he has come hither." Hereupon
         the Heir sent a message to the Prince, his younger brother,
         saying :-" I ha\"e escaped hither alone in fear of the rebellion
x II. 5. of Prince Nakatsu. Why should I not suspect thee? So long
         as the Imperial Prince Nakatsu lives his sale endeavour will
         still be to do me a mischief, and I \vish sooner or later to
         get rid of him. Therefore, if thou hast really' not a black heart,
         return again to N aniha, and kill the Imperial Prince Nakatsu.
         After that I \vill see thee." The Imperial Prince ?vlidzuha wake
         represented to the Heir, sa:ying :-" Is not the Great Man's 2
         anxiet~y excessive? At present the Imperial Prince Nakatsu's
         unprincipled conduct is detested b)~ the officials and the people
         alike. His o\vn household, moreover, are against him, and
         think him a brigand. He stands alone, and there is nobody
         \vhom he can consult. I knew of his rebellion, but I had not
         received the commands of the Heir, and was therefore merely
         indignant at it. No\v that I have received an order, why
         should I make an)' difficulty~ about killing the Imperial Prince
         Nakatsu? All that I fear is that when I have killed him thou
         mayest still suspect thy servant. 8 I pray that a trusty person
         may be selected, and I desire that he should make clear my
         loyalty." Accordingly the Heir joined to him Dzuku no Sukune
         and so despatched him.         Hereupon the Imperial Prince
         Midzuha wake made lament, saying :-" The Heir and the
         In1perial Prince Nakatsu are both my elder brothers: which
         shall I obey? Which shall I oppose? If, hO'h'ever, I destroy
         the unprincipled and adhere to the righteous, \vho can suspect

               I   Ulleme.            I A Chinese honorific for" you."
                                 3 Ch. K.• p. 289.
                                 RICHIU.                                 J26

me ? " So he went to Naniha and observed the state of things
with the Imperial Prince Nakatsu. The Imperial Prince
Nakatsu, thinking that the Heir had fled away and disap-
peared, had made no preparation. Now he had a Hayato I
named Sashihire. Prince Midzuha wake sent for Sashihire
secretly and tampered with him, saying :-" If thou wilt kill
the Imperial Prince for me, then will I surely reward thee
liberally." So he took off his coat and trousers of brocade and
gave them to him. Sashihire, relying on his words of allure-
ment, all by himself took his spear, and watching the time
when the Imperial Prince Nakatsu went into the privy, stabbed
him to death, and entered the service of Prince Midzuha wake.
Hereupon Dsuku no Tsukune made representation to the Im-
perial Prince Midzuha wake, saying :-" Sashihire has killed his
own lord for the sake of another, and although for us he has
done a great service, yet towards his own lord his conduct has
been heartless in the extreme. Shall he be allowed to live? "
So he killed Sashihire.                                          XII. 6.
   That same day the Prince proceeded towards Yamato, and
 at midnight arrived at Iso no Kami, and made his report.
 Hereupon the Heir summoned to him the Prince his younger
 brother, and was liberal of his favour to him, granting him the
 Mura-ahase official granaries. On this day Hamako, Muraji
of Adzumi, was arrested.
  1st year, 2nd month, 1st day. The Prince Imperial assumed A.D. 40Q
the Dignity in the Palace of Waka-zakura at Ihare.
  Summer, 4th month, 17th day. The Emperor summoned
before him Hamako, Muraji of Adzumi, and commanded him,
saying :-" Thou didst plot rebellion \vith the Imperial Prince
Nakatsu in order to overturn the State, and thy offence is
deserving of death. I will, however, exercise great bounty,
and remitting the penalty of death, sentence thee to be
branded.":! The same day he was branded near the eye~

  1 See above, p. 100.    In this passage it seeU1S used as a general name
for retainer. Chamberlain renderi it " man-at-arms~' in the corresponding
passage of the" Kojiki."
  2 Literally "inked."    The branding consisted in tattooing a mark on the
face or other part of the person. U ntiI quite recently criminals were branded
on the ann with ink, each prison having its own special mark. Branding
was originally one of the " five punishments" of China.
        306                             Nil-IONGI.

          Accordingly the men of that time spoke of the" Adzumi eye."
          The fishermen of Nojima who had been Hamako's followers
          were also pardoned their offence, and employed as labourers at
          the official granaries of Komoshiro in Yamato.
             Autumn, 7th month, 4th day. Kurohime, daughter of Rata
          no Sukune, was appointed Imperial concubine. She was the
          mother of the Imperial Prince Oshiha of Ichinobe in Ihazaka,
  XII. 7. of the Imperial Prince Mirna, and of the Imperial Princess
          Awomi.
               One account says :-" The Imperial Princess Ihi-toyo."
             His next concubine, the Imperial Princess Hatahi, was the
          mother of the Imperial Princess Nakashi.
             This year was the year Kanoye Ne (37th) of the Cycle.
A.D. 401     2nd year, Spring, 1st month, 4th day. The Imperial Prince
          Midzuha wake was appointed I-Ieir 1 to the Throne.
             Winter, loth month. The capital was established at Ihare.
          At this time Heguri no Dsuku no Sukune, Saga no Manchi
          no Sukune, Mononobe no Ikofutsu no Ohomuraji, and
          Tsubura no Oho-omi together administered the affairs of the
          country.
             11th month. The Ihare pond was made.
A.D. 402.    3rd year, Winter, 11th month, 6th day. The Emperor
          launched the two-forked boat 2 on the pond of Ichishi at Ihare,
          and went on board with the Imperial concubine, each
          separately, and feasted. 3 The Lord Steward 4 Areshi set sake
           before the Elnperor. At this time a cherry flower fell into the
           Emperor's cup. The Emperor \vondered at this, and sending
           for Mononobe no Nagamake no Muraji, commanded him,
           saying :-" This flower has come out of season. Whence
           does it come? Do thou thyself seek." Hereupon Nagamake
           no Muraji went himself and sought for the flowers. He found
  XII. 8. them on Mount Wakikamunomuro and presented them to the
            Emperor. The Emperor was delighted to get such a rare
           thing, and so made them the name of the Palace. Therefore

           I Nate that the brother \vas made heir, though there were children.
           2 See above, p. 297.
           3 i.e. one in one fork of the boat, the other in the other.

           4 Kashihade no Omi.        The context shows that this is here an official
         designation, and not a mere title, much less a surname.
                                  }{ICHIU.                               J26

it was called the Palace of Ihare no Wakazakura. 1      This \vas
the origin of the name.
   In this month the original title of" N agamake no ~I uraji "
was altered to "Wakazakura Be no Miyakko," and the Lord
Steward, Areshi, was styled Wakazakura Be no Omi.
   4th year/ ~\utumn, 8th month, 8th day. Local Recorders A.D. 403.
\vere appointed for the first time in the various provinces, "rho
noted down statements, and communicated the writings of the
four quarters.
   Winter, loth month. The Iso no kami conduit was ex-
cavated.
   5th year, Spring, 3rd month, 1st day. The three Deities S A.D. 404.
who d\vell in Tsukushi appeared within the palace and said : -
" Why are we robbed of our people? We will now disg-race
thee." Hereupon the Emperor prayed, but his prayer ,vas
 not answered.
   Autumn, 9th month, 18th day. The Emperor \vent a-
 hunting to the Island of Ahaji. On this day the Kahachi
 Horse-keepers' Be were in attendance on the Emperor, and held XII. 9.
 the bit. Before this the Horse-keepers' Be had been branded 4
·on the face, and none of their \vounds had yet healed. Now
 the God Izanagi, who dwells in the island, spoke by the mouth
 of a hafuri, saying :-" I cannot endure the stench of blood."
 Accordingly' divination was made, and the answer \vas, " The
 God dislikes the smell of the branding of the Horse-keepers' Be."
 Therefore from that time forward the branding of the Horse-
 keepers' Be was utterly discontinued.
    19th day. There was a sound as of a blast of wind which
 cried aloud in the Great Void, saying :-" 0 thou Prince,
 inheritor of The Sword! "        Again there was a voice which
                                   ij




  1   i.e. young cherry.   'This cannot be correct.   See above, 3rd year of
Jingo K6gu, \V"hose capital ,vas also at Ihare, and was called Wakazakura.
  2 We have not yet got do\\'n to tilnes of accurate chronology.      Wani's
arrival ·was in 405, and it is not likely that recorders were appointed till a
good many years later. Exanlples of these "statements" occur frequently
belo\v. Most of them fall under the description of folk-lore.
  J Probably the three children of the Sun·(~oddess nlentioned at p. 37.

  " The branding here is not a crilninal punishment, but only a distinctive
Inark.
  b The s\\'ord \vas one of the Regalia.
        308                              NIHONGI.

         said :-" Thy younger sister 1 of bird-frequented Rata has gone
         to be buried at Rasa. [Another version is :-" Sanakita no
         Komotsu 2 no Mikoto has gone to be buried at Hasa."] Sud-
         denlya messenger arrived in haste, who said :-" The Imperial
         concubine is dead." The Emperor was greatly shocked, and
         straightway ordering his carriage/I returned.
            22nd day. The Emperor arrived from Ahaji.
            Winter, loth month, 11th day. The Imperial concubine was
         buried. After this the Emperor, vexed with himself that he had
         not appeased the divine curse, and had so caused the death of the
         Imperial concubine, again sought to ascertain where the fault
         lay. Some one said :-" The Kimi of the Cart-keepers 4 went
         to the Land of Tsukushi, where he held a review of all the
XII. 10. Cart-ke~pers'Be, and he took along with them the men allotted
         to the service of the Deities. This must surely be the offence."
         The Emperor straightway summoned to him the Kimi of the
         Cart-keepers and questioned him. The facts having been
         ascertained, the Emperor enumerated his offences, saying:-
         " Thou, although only Kimi of the Cart-keepers, hast arbitrarily
         appropriated the subjects of the Son of Heaven.& This is one
         offence. Thou didst wrongfully take them, comprising them
         in the Cart-keepers' Be after they had been allotted to the
         service of the Gods of Heaven and Earth. This is a second
         offence." So he imposed on him the expiation of evil and the
         expiation of good, 6 and sent him away to Cape Nagasa, there
         to perform the rites of expiation. After he had done so, the
         Emperor commanded him, saying :-" Henceforward thou
         mayest not ~ave charge of the Cart-keepers' Be of Tsuku~hi."
         So he confiscated them all, and allotted them anew, giving them
         to the three Deities.
A.De 405    6th year, Spring, 1st month, 6th day. The Imperial
          Princess Hatahi of Kusaka was appointed Empress.7

          I  Kurohime, the Imperial concubine, is meant.
          i  Apparently another name for Princess Hata.
          S The word carriage is not to be taken too literally.    The kana interlinea"
        gloss has Ohon Dluma ni tatematsurite, \vhich means" mounted his horse."
          -I Kuruma-mochi.                        ii The Enlperor.

          I) i.e. a fine of the articles required in the ceremony of purgation or
        expiation. See above, p. 48.
          '; She was the Elnperor's half-sister..
                                  RICHIU.                                  J26

   9th day. A Treasury was instituted and a Treasury 1 Be
established.
   2nd month, 1st day. The Emperor sent for Futohime no
Iratsume and Takatsuru no Iratsume, daughters of Prince
Funashi \vake, and having bestowed them in the Empress's
palace/ made them both his concubines. 3 Upon this the two XII. II.
concubines lamented continually, saying :-" Alas! Whither
has the Prince, our elder brother, gone?" The Emperor heard
their lamentation, and inquired of them, saying :-" \Vhy do
ye lament?" Theyanswered and said :-" Thy handmaidens'
elder brother, Prince '''l'ashizumi, is strong and nimble.
Alone he has taken a running leap over an eight-fathom house,
and gone away. Many da}rs have passed that we have not
spoken to him face to face. Therefore do we lament." The
Emperor was pleased to hear of his great strength, and sent
for him. But he ,,,"auld not come. Again messenger after
messenger \vas sent to summon him, but still he would not
come, and. continued to reside in the village of Suminoye.
After this the Emperor ceased to demand his presenc~. He
\\"as the first ancestor of the two houses of the Miyakko of
Sanuki and the \Vake of Ashikuhi in Aha.
    3rd month, 15th dayr. The Emperor's precious body became
ill at ease, and, the elements of water and earth being inhar-
monious, he died in the Palace of Waka-zakura, at the age of
seventy."
  1 The Treasury means the office, the 13e the staff:  rrhe" Kogo-jui " says :-
"Until the reign of the latter Ihare no Waka-zakura (i.e. Richiu Tenno)
the three Han failed not to send tribute for many generations. Beside the
Sacred Treasury, there \vas erected an Inner Treasury, where the official
property \\"as classified and deposited. Achi no Olni and Wang-in (or
Wani), the learned 111en of Pt)kche, were Inade to record the ingoings and
outcolllings. A Treasury 13e was first establjshed.~' If \\'e allo\v for the
error of t\VO cycles, this year, A.l>. 405, is the very year in \vhich Wang-in
arrived. But the " ~ ihongi " chronology cannot yet be depended on.
  The" Shoku-in-rei" says :-" The Interior Treasury Department has one
Chief, \vho has control of gold and silver, je,,"els, precious utensils, brocade
and satin, sarsnet, rugs and luattresses, and the rare objects sent as tribute
by the various barbarians."
  At WOlnen's apartments.

  ;j The character used implies a subordinate rar.k.


  .. Other calculations tnake him sixty-four, seventy-sc\"en, eighty-five, and
eighty-seven. It i') obvious that none of then1 can be relied on.
             3 10                            NIHONGI.

               Winter, loth month, 4th day. The Emperor was buried In
             the misasagi on the Plain of Mozu no Mimi.



                                THE EMPEROR MIDZUHAWAKE. 1


                                        (HANZEl TENNO'J
                                                  OR

XII.   12.                           HANSHO TENNJ.)

           The Emperor Midzuhawake was a younger brother by the
         same mother of the Emperor Izaho-wake. He was appOiltted
         Prince Imperial in the second year of the Emperor Izaho-
         wake. The Emperor was born in the Palace of Ahaji. At his.
         birth his teeth were like one bone,s and his appearance was
         beautiful. Now there was a well called Midzn no wi (the
         beautiful well) from which water was drawn to wash the Heir"
         to the Throne. A tajihi ii flower had fallen into this well and
         it was accordingly made the name of the Heir to the
         Throne. The tajihi flower is what is now the itadori flower.
         Therefore he was styled the Emperor Tajihi 6 no Midzuha-
         wake.
            The Emperor Izaho-wake died in Spring, the 3rd month of
         the 6th year of his reign.
A.D 406.    1st year, Spring, 1St month, 2nd day. The Heir Apparent
         assumed the Imperial Dignity.

               1   Midzu ha Ineans beautiful teeth.
               2 This is explained \0   mean "the Emperor who turned matters into the
             right path," han meaning turn, and sei or sho " right."
                I In the Bamboo Books (U Legge's Chinese Classics "), p. 143, there is

             mention of an ancient Chinese king whose teeth were one piece of bone.
             The" Kojiki" says (Ch. K., p. 292) :-" The length of his august teeth was
             one inch, and their breadth two lines, and the upper and lower [row] corre-
             sponded exactly, like je\\·els strung [together]."
                 " He was not Heir at this time.
                 n The Polygonum Cuspidatum.        Hepburn.
                 • The ., Seishi roku" states that in consequence of this incident Tajihi Be
             ,,"ere established in all the provinces to be the villages for the hot baths of
             the Imperial Princes.
                                 HANZEl.                                3 11
  Autumn, 8th month, 6th day. Tsuno hime, daughter of
Kogoto, ancestor of the Omi of Ohoyake, was appointed XII. 13-
Imperial concubine. 1 She was the mother of the Imperial
Princess Kahihime, and of the Imperial Princess Tsubura.
Moreover, he took to him the Imperial concubine's younger
sister Otohime, who bore to him the Imperial Princess Takara
and the Imperial Prince Takabe.
   Winter, loth month. The capital was established at Tajihi ~
in Kahachi. It was called the Palace of Shibagaki.
   At this time the rain and wind were seasonable, and the five
kinds of grain reached maturity; the people enjoyed abundance,
and the Empire was at peace.
   This year was the year Hinoye Miima (43rd) of the Cycle.
   6th 3 year, Spring, 1st month, 29th day. The Emperor died 4 A.D. 4 f O.
in the chief sleeping-chamber.

   1 The word for concubine here is ~ A.          We have now had three
ranks of concubines mentioned, showing that Chinese custolns were cOIning
in. In the older reigns the only distinction tnade is that of the Empress
and other consorts.
   2 This is hardly consistent with the story of the tajihi flower on the

previous page.
   3 The original reading is 6th.  The" Shukai " editor \vould correct it into
5th from the" Kiujiki." It signifies extremely little which reading \ve take,.
as no reliance can yet be placed on any of the dates given .
   .. The age of this Emperor is not stated here. The" Kojiki " says sixty.




                                                                   y
                                   BOOK XIII.
                                                                             1
            THE EMPEROR \VO-ASA-TSUMA WAKUGO NO SUKUNE.


                                (ING10 2 TENNO.)

       THE Emperor W o-Asa-tsuma wakugo no Sukune was a younger
         brother by the same mother of the Emperor Midzuha wake.
            From infancy to puberty,S the Emperor was kind and unas-
         suming. \Vhen he attained to manhood, he became very ill
         and lost the free use of his limbs.
            The Emperor lVlidzuha wake died in Spring, the 1st month
         of the 5th year of his reign. Hereupon the Ministers held
         counsel, saying :-" There are at the present time the Imperial
         Princes Wo-Asa-tsuma wakugo no Sukune and Oho-Kusaka,
         children of the Emperor Oho-sazaki. The Imperial Prince
         Wo-Asa-tsuma wakugo no Sukune, however, is the elder, and
         of an affectionate, dutiful disposition." So they chose a lucky
         day, and kneeling down, offered him the Imperial sign~t. The
         Imperial Prince Wo-Asa-tsuma wakugo no Sukune declined it,
         saying :-" I am an unlucky man, long afflicted with a grievous
         disease, which I cannot shake off. I am unable to walk. Of
          myself, without informing the Emperor, I have secretly treated
XIII. 2. my disease by self-mutilation,4 in the hope of getting rid of it,
          but still I am not healed. Therefore the former Emperor chid
          me, saying :-' \Vhat greater extreme of unfilialness can there
          be than this conduct of thine, in wantonly mutilating thy body

           1 Wo, male; Asa-tsulna (n10rning-wife) is the nalne of a place ; \vakugo~
        young child; Sukune, name of dignity.
           ~ Ingio is froln the" Shooking," the Canon of Yaou, § I, ,vhere Legge
        translates " sincerely c<?urteous."
           3 The words translated infancy and puberty are in the original descriptive

       ,of the mode of dressing the hair at these periods of life in China.
           4 The precise meaning is doubtful.
                             iNGIO.                     3 13
because thou sufferest from disease?        However long thou
mayst live, thou must never succeed to the throne.' l\foreover,
the two Emperors, m)" elder brothers, despised me and thought
me a fool, as is known to all the Ministers. N ow the Empire
is a great organization: the Imperial Dignity is a vast institu-
tion: and to be the father and mother of the people is the
office of a sage. How can such a charge be given to a fool?
Make another choice of some wise Prince, and let him be esta-
blished as Emperor. I, the un\vorthy one, may not presume
to fill the office." The Ministers bowed down twice, and said:
- " The Imperial Dignity should not be long vacant; the com-
mand of Heaven should not be modestly refused. V/e, thy
servants, fear that if thou, the Great Prince, dost delay the
time, and in opposition to the general desire dost refuse to
rectify the name and dignity, the nation's hopes will be disap-
pointed. We pray therefore that the Great Prince, notwith-
standing his sufferings, will yet assume the Imperial Dignity."
The Imperial Prince Wo-Asa-tsuma wakugo no Sukune said : -
 " It is a weighty matter to take charge of the ancestral temples
and the'temples of the earth and of grain! I, the unworthy
one, am grievously ill, and am incompetent to fill this office
\vorthily." He continued to decline it, and would not give his
consent. Hereupon all the Ministers persisted in their petition,
saying :-" In the humble opinion of thy servants, thou, the XIII. 3.
 Great Prince, art eminently worthy to take over charge of the
 Temples of thy Imperial Ancestors. Even the myriad people
 of the Empire all deem thee fit. "'e pray thee, 0 Great
 Prince, to give thy consent."
   1st year, Winter, 12th month. The Prince's concubine, A.D. 412.
 Osaka no Oho-nakatsu hi me no ~Iikoto, \vas grieved at the
 mutterings of vexation of the Ministers, and taking in her own
 person water for washing the hands, came before the Imperial
 Prince and addressed him, saying :-" Thou, 0 Great Prince,
 having declined to assume the Dignity, it has remained vacant
 for years and lTIonths. The l"finisters and functionaries are
 grieved, and kno\v not what to do. I pray? thee, 0 Great
 Prince, con1ply with the general wish, and, ho\vever reluctantly,
 assume the Imperial Dignity." The Imperial Prince, ho\vever,

                       1   i.e. " the state.~~
        J26                              NIHONGI.

          was loath to consent, and turning his back upon her, sat
          without saying a word. Hereupon Oho-nakatsu hime no
          Mikoto was afraid, and not knowing how to retire, remained
          in attendance on the Prince for four or five half-hours. It was
          then the 12th month, and the wind was blowing fierce and
          chill. The water in the basin which Oho-nakatsu hime had
          brought overflowed and became frozen on her arm. Unable to
          endure the cold, she was almost dying. The Imperial Prince
          looked round, and was shocked. He helped her to her feet,
          and said to her :-" The succession to the Dignity is so weighty
          a matter that I could not abruptly assume it. Therefore I have
          not complied up to the present. Now, however, the request of
          the Ministers is manifestly just. Why should I persist in my
          refusal?" Hereupon Oho-nakatsu hime looked up delighted,
          and told all the Ministers, saying :-" The Imperial Prince is
          about to give ear to the request of the Ministers. Now is the
          time to offer him the Imperial signet."          Thereupon the
 XIII. 4. Ministers were much rejoiced, and on that same day delivered
          up to him the Imperial signet with repeated obeisances. The
          Imperial Prince said :-" Ye Ministers have, on behalf of the
          Empire, made a joint request of unworthy me. How can I
          presume to persist in refusing it?" So he assumed the
          Imperial Dignity.
            This year was the year Midzunoye Ne (49th) of the Cycle.
A.D. 4 3.
      1      2nd year, Spring, 2nd month, I4th day. Osaka no Oho-
          nakatsu hime was appointed Empress. On this day there was
          established on behalf of the Empress the Osaka Be. 1
             The Empress was the mother of the Imperial Prince Kinashi
          Karu, of the Imperial Princess Nagata no Oho-iratsume, of the
          Imperial Prince Sakahi no Kuro-hiko, of the Emperor Anaho,
          of the Imperial Princess Karu no Oho-iratsume, of the Imperial

           1 The " Kojiki " says that the Osaka Be \vas established as the Empress's

        na-shiro, which Chamberlain lenders by" proxy." I would prefer to call it
        " name-sake." The object was to perpetuate the name of the Empress-at
        least, if this account is correct. But there was an Osaka Be already in
        existence. It is mentioned in the 39th year of Suinin's reign. Besides, the
        Osaka Be \",ere the executioners, a cirCUlnstance \vith which it is difficult to
        reconcile the statement in the text. It is true, however, that the Empress'5
        full nanle ,vas Osaka no Oho-nakatsu hilue, Osaka being the name of her
        residence.
                                   I NGIO.                                J26

Prince Yatsuri no Shiro-hiko, of the Emperor Oho-hatsuse
Waka-take, of the Imperial Princess Tajima no Tachibana no
Oho-iratsume, and of the Imperial Princess Sakami.
   At an earlier period, when the Empress was at home with
her mother, she was walking alone in the garden, when the
Miyakko of the Land of Tsuke passed along the road which
was beside the garden. He was on horseback, and looking
over the hedge, he addressed the Empress, and said mockingly:
-" What an excellent gardener thou art." He also said:-
"Pray, madam, let me have one of those orchids." The
Empress accordingly plucked an orchid root, and gave it to the XIII. 5·
man on horseback, asking him for what purpose he wanted the
orchid. The man on horseback answered and said :-" I am
going to the mountain, and it is to brush away the midges."
Then the Empress reflected on this within her mind, and
recognized the want of respect in the words of the man on
horseback. So she addressed him, saying :-" Sir,' I shall not
forget this."
   Afterwards, in the year in \\,hich the Empress attained the
felicitous rank, she sought out the man on horseback who had
asked her for an orchid, and having stated his former offence,
wished to have him put to death. Hereupon the man \vho had
asked for the orchid knocked his forehead on the ground, and
making a deep obeisance,2 said :-" Truly thy servant's guilt is
deserving of ten thousand deaths. At that time, however, I
did not know that thou wert of high rank." Hereupon the
Empress remitted the penalty of death, but deprived him of his
title and called him Inaki.~
   3 rd year, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. An envoy was sent to A D. 4 14.
Silla to procure a good physician.
   Autumn, 8th month. The physician arrived from Silla, and
was forthwith made to treat the Emperor's disease. No long
time after, he was healed of his disease. The Emperor was

   1 The Chinese character translated" sir" means literally head or chief.

The Japanese word intended is probably Obito or Obnto, which, I take it, is
an abbreviation of Oho-bito, great man. In Chinese l"ajen (in Corean Tain),
i.e. great luan, is used as a personal pronoun in addressing lnen of rank.
Our own word" lnaster" (lnagister, Inagnus) has a sOlne\\'hat sinlilar history.
   2 Kowtow in Chinese.

   3 Inaki \vas a lo\ver title than Miyakko.
         J26                               NIHONGI.

           rejoiced, and having rewarded the physician liberally, sent 11im
           back to his own country.
 XIII. 6.
A.D. 415.
              4th year, Autumn, 9th month,9th day. The Emperor made
           a decree, saying :-" In the most ancient times, good govern-
           ment consisted in the subjects having each one his proper
           place, and in names 1 being correct. I t is now four years since
           We entered on the auspicious office. Superiors and inferiors
           dispute with one another: the hundred surnames 2 are not at
           peace. Some by mischance lose their proper surnames; others
           purposely lay claim to high family. This is perhaps the reason
           why good government is not attained to. Deficient in wisdom
           although We are, how can We omit to rectify these irregularities?
           Let the Ministers take counsel, and inform me of their deter-
           mination." All the Ministers said :-" If Your Majesty, restor-
           ing that which is lost and correcting that which is perverted,
           will thus determine Houses and surnames, your servants will
           stake their lives in recommending the adoption of such a
           measure."
              28th day. The Emperor made a decree, saying :-" The
           ministers, functionaries, and the Miyakko of the various pro-
           vinces eaeh and all describe themselves, some as descendants of
           Emperors, others attributing to their race a miraculous origin,
           and saying that their ancestors came down froln Heaven. a
            However, since the three Powers of Nature 4 assumed distinct
           forms/i many tens of thousands of years have elapsed, so
           that single Houses 6 have multiplied and have formed anew
           ten thousand surnames of doubtful authenticity. Therefore let
            the people of the various Houses and surnames wash themselves
            and practise abstinence, and let them, each one calling the
  XIII. 7. Gods to witness, plunge their hands in boiling water." The
            caldrons of the ordeal by boiling water were therefore placed on
            the" Evil Door of Words" spur of the Amagashi Hill. Every-

            1 Literally surnanles and personal names.       "'That is really meant is titles.
         There \vere no proper surnames at this time. See above, p. 27.
            2 The \vord for "hundred SUrnallleS" is       a    ~1, which is also used for
         the nation generally, and in later tilnes in Japan for the peasantry. Here
         its original meaning ll1ust be kept in vie\v.
            3 The" Sei-shi-roku " contains nUlllerous instances of this.

            4 Heaven, Earth, and l'vlan.    Vitle :\laycrs, p. 302.
            1 Since the creation, as \VC \v,Juld say.                       Ii Uji.
                                  INGIO.                                 J26

body was told to go thither, saying :-" He \vho tells the truth
will be uninjured; he who is false will assuredly suffer harm."
        This is called Kuka-tachi. Sometimes mud was put
      into a caldron and made to boil up. Then the arms were
      bared, and the boiling mud stirred \\·ith them. Sometimes
      an axe was heated red-hot and placed on the palm of the
      hand.
    Hereupon everyone put on straps of tree-fibre, and coming
to the caldrons, plunged their hands in the boiling water, when
those who were true remained naturally uninjured, and all those
who were false were harrned. Therefore those who had falsi-
fied (their titles) were afraid, and slipping a\vay beforehand,
did not come forward. From this time forward the Houses
and surnames were spontaneously ordered, and there was no
longer anyone who falsified them.}
    5th ~year, 7th month, 14th day. There was an earthquake. A.D. 416.
Before this time Tamada no Sukune, grandson 2 of Katsuraki no
Sotsuhiko, had been commanded to superintend the temporary
burial of the Emperor Midzu-ha-wake. On the evening: after
the earthquake, Aso, Ohari no Muraji, was sent to examine the
condition of the shrine of temporary burial. N ow all the men
assembled, and none were absent except Tamada no Sukune, XIII. 8.
who was not present. Aso reported to the Emperor, saying:-
"Tamada no Sukune, the High Officer of the Shrine of
temporary interment, was not to be seen at the temporary
 place of interment." Accordingly, Aso was sent again to
 Katsuraki to see Tamada no Sukune. On this day it so
 happened that Tamada no Sukune had gathered together men
 and women and was holding revel. Aso made a statement of
 all the circumstances to Tamada no Sukune. Tamada no
 Sukune was afraid that trouble might ensue, and gave Aso a
 horse as a present. However, he secretly waylaid Aso and
 killed him on the road. Therefore he ran away and concealed
 himself within the precinct of the tom!;> of Takechi no Sukune.
 When the Emperor heard this, he sent for Tamada no Sukune.
  1 This nleasure can only have been applicable to a dominant caste.       The
nation cannot have all been subjected to the ordeal at Amagashi. Doubtless,
then as no\\", the bulk of the people cared little for genealogies, and indeed
had none but personal nalnes.
  ~ Below, XIV. 20, he is the son of SotsuhikC'.
        3 18                           NIHONGI.

          Tamada no Sukune was suspicious, and put on armour under
          his clothing and so presented himself. The border of the
          armour projected from within his garment. The Emperor, in
          order to ascertain clearly how this was, made an U neme, named
          Woharida, present sake to Tamada no Sukune. Now the
          Uneme observing distinctly that there was armour underneath
          his clothing, reported this particularly to the Emperor. The
          Emperor got ready soldiers and was about to kill Tamada no
          Sukune, when he secretly ran away and hid in his house. The
          Emperor again despatched soldiers, who surrounded Tamada's
          house, took him, and put him to death.
             Winter, 11th month, 11th day. The Emperor Midzu-ha-
          wake was buried in the Mimihara Misasagi.
A.D. 418.
 XIII. 9.    7th year, Winter, 12th month, 1st day. There was a banquet
          in the new Palace. l The Emperor in person played on the
          lute, t and the Empress stood up and danced. When the
          dance was ended, she did not repeat the compliment. At
          that time it was the custom at a banquet for the dancer, when
          the dance was ended, to turn to the person who occupied the
          highest place, an say," I offer thee a woman,," Now the
          Emperor said to the Empress :-" 'Vhy hast thou failed to say
          the usual compliment? " The Empress was afraid. She stood
          up again and danced, and when the dance was over, she
          said :-" I offer thee a woman." The Emperor forthwith
          inquired of the Empress, saying :-" Who is the woman whom
          thou offerest me? I wish to know her name." The Empress
          could not help herself, and addressed the Emperor, saying:-
          " It is thy handmaiden's younger sister, whose name is Oto..
          hime." s Otohime's countenance was of surpassing and peerless
          beauty. Her brilliant colour shone out through her raiment,
          so that the men of that time gave her the designation of
          Sotohori Iratsume." The Emperor's wishes had dwelt upon
           1 The interlinear kana has nliya, palace, for ~, oftener rendered muro.

        But nihi-muro, new mura, is probably the \vord really meant.
          ~ Koto.
          :1 Otohime means simply" the) ounger lady."
          .. Clothing- pass • maiden. "fhe "Kojiki" makes her the Ell1peror's
        daughter. Cf. Shelley's-
                       " Child of Light! thy limbs are burning,
                         ThlOUgh the vest which seems to hide them."
                                  INGIO.                                  J26

Sotohori Iratsume, and therefore it was that he insisted on the
Empress's offering her to him, while the Empress, knowing
this, was reluctant to make the compliment. Now the Emperor
was delighted, and the very next day he despatched a messenger
to summon Otohime. At this time Otohime dwelt with her
mother at Sakata in the land of Afumi. But she feared the
feelings of the Empress and therefore refused to come. Again
seven times she was sent for, and yet she obstinately refused
and did not come. Upon this the Emperor was displeased,
and again gave command to one of the Toneri, a Nakatomi
 named Ikatsll 1 no Omi, saying :-" The damsel Otohime, who
was given to me by the Empress, has not come although sent
 for. Do thou go thyself and bring Otohime here with thee, and
 I will surely reward thee liberally." Hereupon Ikatsu no Omi,
 having received the Imperial command, withdrew, and having
concealed a stock of provisions in his clothing, went to Sakata,
where he prostrated himself in Otohime's courtyard, and
 said :-" By command of the Emperor, I summon thee."
 Otohime answered and said :-" Far be it from me not to
 fear the Emperor's command. But I am unwilling to hurt the
 Empress's feelings. Thy handmaiden will not come, though XIII. 10.
 it should cost her her life to refuse." Then Ikatsu no Omi
 answered and said :-" As thy servant has received the
 Emperor's commands, I must bring thee back with me. If I
 bring thee not back, I shall surely incur punishment. There-
 fore it is better to die lying prostrate in this courtyard than to
 return and undergo the extreme penalty." So for seven days
 he lay prostrate in the courtyard, and although food and drink
 were offeied to him, he refused to taste them, but secretly ate
  the provisions in his bosom. Hereupon Otohime said :-" By
  reason of the Empress's jealousy, thy handmaiden has already
  disobeyed the Emperor's commands. To be the ruin of my
  Lord, who art his faithful servant, would be another crime on
  my part." Accordingly she came along with Ikatsu no Omi.
  When they reached Kasuga in Yamato they had food by the
  well of Ichihi. Otohime herself gave sake to the Omi, and
  soothed his spirit. The Omi that same day arrived at the

  1 As he ,vas Toneri, the lkatsu no Olni is clearly a luere title, like the no
Rami's of recent tilnes.
        3 20                            NIHONGI.

            capital, and having lodged Otohime at the house cf Akoko,
            the Atahe of Yamato, made his report to the Emperor. The
            Emperor was greatly rejoiced. He commended Ikatsu no
            Omi, and showed him liberal favour. The Empress, however,
            showed her vexation, and Otohinle could therefore not approach
            the interior of the Palace. Accordingly, a separate building
            was erected for her at Fujihara, and she dwelt there. l On the
            night that the Empress gave birth to the Emperor Oho-
            hatsuse, the Emperor for the first time went to the Fujihara
            Palace. The Empress hearing this, was angry, and said:-
            " Many years have passed since I first bound up my hair and
            became thy companion in the hinder palace. It is too cruel
            of thee, 0 Emperor. Wherefore, just on this night when I
            am in childbirth and hanging between life and death, must
            thou go to Fujihara?" So she went out, set fire to the
            parturition house, and was about to kill herself. The
            Emperor, hearing this, was greatly shocked, and said :-" \Ve
            are wrong." So with explanations he soothed the mind of the
            Empress.
A.D. 4 1 9.    8th year, Spring, 2nd month. The Emperor went to Fuji-
            hara and secretly observed how matters were with Sotohori
XIII. II. Iratsume. That night Sotohori Iratsume was sitting alone,
            thinking fondly of the Emperor. Unaware of his approach,
            she made a song, saying:----

                                  This is the night
                                  My husband will COlne.
                                  The little crab-
                                  The spider's action
                                  To-night is ulanifest.'


          The Emperor, when he heard this song, was touched by it,.
        and made a song, saying:-


           1 Hence perhaps the nalne Soto-wori.hime, or the Lady \vho lives without.
        as opposed to Oho·nakatsu himet the dalne of the Great Interior.
          ~ It was considered that when a spider clung to one's garments, it was a
        sign that an intimate friend would arrive. Little crab is another name for
        spider. Sotohori hime was in after times looked on as the "Muse of
        poetry." This poem is a regular Tanka, as are the others in this passage.
                            INGIO.                         "'21
                                                           ,)


                      Loosening and relTIoving
                      'fhe brocade sash
                      Of snlall pattern,
                      Not uften haye I slept-
                      But one night only.


  The next morning, the Emperor looked at the cherry flo\vers
beside the well, and made a song, saying:-

                      .~s one loves the cherry
                      S \\'eet of blosSOll1,
                      Did I love another,
                      Then her I should not love-
                      The girl "'haITI I love.


   This came to the Empress's ear, and she was very \vroth.
Hereupon Sotohori Iratsume addressed the Emperor, saying:-
" Thy handmaiden desires to be al\vays near the Royal Palace,
and night and day \vithout ceasing to vie'v the glory of Your
Majesty. But the Empress, being thy handmaiden's elder
sister, is, on her account, continually resentful towards Your
Majesty, and is also vexed because of thy handmaiden. I pray
therefore that I may be removed far from the Royal dwelling,
and I \vish to live at a distance. This might perhaps cause
the Empress's jealousy some\vhat to abate." The Emperor XIII I~.
forth\vith built ane\v a palace in Chinu in I<ahachi, and made
Sotohori Iratsume to d\vell there. And for this reason he
frequently \vent a-hunting to the moor of Hine.
   9th year, Spring, 2nd month. The Emperor made a progress A.n. ~~O.
to the Palace of Chinu.
   Autumn, 8th month. The Emperor made a progress to
Chinn.
   \Vinter, loth month. The Emperor made a progress to
Chinn.
   loth year, Spring, 1st month. The Emperor made a progress .\.0, 4.!L
to Cllinu. Hereupon the Empress addressed him, saying:-
"Thy handmaiden is not a ,,,hit jealous of her younger sister.
Only she fears that the people may be distressed by Your
Majesty's frequent progresses to Chinn. I humbly pray thee
to diminish the nun1ber of thy visits." l"'hereafterhis excursions
thither \vere infrequent.
                3 22                            NIHONGI.

A.D.   4 22 •     11th )1ear, Spring, 3rd month, 4th day. The Emperor made
                a progress to the Palace of Chinu. Sotohori Iratsume made a
                song, saying : -
                                      For ever and ever,
                                      Oh ! that I Inig-ht Ineet my Lord!
                                      As often as drift beach\vard
                                      The \veeds of the shore of ocean
                                      (\Vhere \vhales are caught).


                Then the Emperor spake to Sotohori Iratsume, sayIng:-
             " No other person must hear this song. For if the Empress
             heard it, she \vould surely be greatly \vroth." Therefore the
             men of that time gave a name to the shore-weed and called it
             Na-nori-ahi-mo. 1
XIII. 13.       Before this time, \vhen Sotohori Iratsume dwelt in the Palace
             of Fujihara, the Emperor commanded Ohotomo Muru)ra no
             Muraji, sa:ying :-" Of late we have gotten a beautiful \voman,
             the )"ounger sister of the Empress by the same mother. 2 In
             OUf heart \ve dearly love her, and it is Our desire that her
             name should be handed do\vn to after ages. How can this be
             done?" In accordance with the Imperial command, Muruya
             no l\1uraji proposed a plan for the Emperor's approval. Conse-
             quently the Miyakko of the various provinces \vere charged to
             establish Fujihara Be on behalf of Sotohori hime.
 A.D. 4 2 5.    14th year, Autumn, 9th month, 12th day. The Emperor
             hunted in the island of Ahaji. Now the deer, monkeys, and
             \vild boar, like dust-clouds, confusedly, filled the mountains and
             valleys. They sprang up like flames of fire, they were dispersed
             like flies. And yet all day long not a single beast \vas caught.
             Here\vith the hunt \vas suspended, and divination was made
             anew. Then the God of the Island 3 gave an oracular utterance,


                    1 Na-nori-ahi means" mutually to tell one's nanle," and Ina is the general
                word for seaweed. 'fhere is a sea\veed so called, but \vhat this cirCUlllstance
                has to do \vith the story is not clear.
                   :1 The traditional kana has haha-hara-kara.      As hara-kara by its deriva-
                tion lneans "of the saine \vonlb," it is needless to prefix haha, 1110ther. But
                this sho\vs that when these kana glosses were \"ritten, hara-kara had COll1e
                to mean sinlply brother or sister, as it does at present.
                   3 Izanagi.
                                  IN(iIO.                                 J26

sayIng :-" It \vas by my intent that no beast \vas caught. In
the bottom of the sea of Akashi there is a pearl. If this pearl is
sacrificed to me, ~ye shall be able to catch all the beasts." Here-
upon they proceeded to assemble the fishermen of the various
places, and made them search the bottom of the sea of Akashi.
"Then they dived into the sea, however, they were unable to
reach the bottom.         But there was one fisherman named XIII. l-t             o




Wosashi, a fisher of Naga-zato in the province of Aha, who
excelled all the fishers. He tied a rope to his loins, and \vent
down to the bottom of the sea. After some time he came forth,
and said :-" In the bottom of the sea there is a great sea-ear,l
and this place is shining." Everybody said :-" Probably the
pearl which the God of the Island has asked for is in this sea-
ear's belly." Again he went in and searched for it. Hereupon
 W osashi came to the surface with the great sea-ear in his arms,
 but his breath had ceased, and he died on the surface of the
 waves. Afterwards a rope was let down and the bottom of the
 sea was measured. The depth was found to be sixty fathoms.
 When the sea-ear was split open, a true pearl was found in its
 belly, in size like a peach. This was offered to the God of the
 Island, and a hunt being made, they caught many beasts. But
 they grieved that Vlosashi had met his death by entering the
 sea, and made a tomb, in which they reverently interred him.
That tomb exists at the present day.
    23rd year, Spring, 3rd month, 7th day. The Imperial Prince A.D. 434.
 Kinashi Karu was made Heir to the Throne. He was fair to
look upon, and those \vho saw him spontaneously loved him.
 His sister by the same mother/ the Imperial Princess Karu
 no Oho-iratsume, was also beautiful. The Heir Apparent's
 thoughts ,vere constantly bent on becoming united to the

  1  rrhe ahabi or Haliotis tuberculata.
  ~ The    prolnil1ence given to brotherhood and sisterhood by the saine
Inother in the ., Nihongi," as in Houler, has not, it appears to me, the sig-
nificant:e attributed to it by McLennan's theory, \vhich \vould trace back such
tenlls'to a time when the lllother \Vai the only parent as to \VhOlll there
could be no doubt. I t seems to l1le that the father's parentage is here
taken for granted, the phrase really meaning brother or sister bv the
Inother~s side as well as by the father's, and that such phrases are Inerely
indications of polyganlolls custonls, not necessarily of prolniscuity or
polyandry.
              J26                              NIHONGI.

              Imperial Princess Oho-iratsume, but he dreaded the guilt,l and
              was silent. But his passion had become so violent that he was
              well-nigh on the point of ~death. Hereupon he thought to
              himself, " I will not die for nothing. It may be a crime, but
              how can I endure?" At last he became secretly united to her,
              and so his desperate passion became somewhat abated.
              Accordingly he made a song, saying : -

                                     On the foot-dragging 11l0untaln,
                                     Rice-fields are Inade;
                                     So high is the nlountain,
                                     l"he "yater-pipes are run beneath-
                                     Like thenl the hidden tears
                                     That I wept for IUy spouse,
                                     The unshared tears
XIII. 15.                            That I wept for my spouse,
                                     But to-day, this very day,
                                     Freely our bodies touch. 2


A.D.   435.      24th year, Summer, 6th month. The soup for the Emperor's
              meal froze, and became ice. The Em.peror wondered, and had
              divination made in order to learn the meaning of it. The
              diviner said :-" There is domestic disorder/J perhaps the illicit
              intercourse of near relations with one another." Then some
              one said :-" The Heir Apparent, Kinashi Karu, has seduced
              his younger sister by the same mother, the Imperial Princess
              Karu no Iratsume." So examination was made, and it was
              found that these words were true. The JIeir Apparent being
              the successor to the Throne, it ,vas impossible to punish him,

                 1 See Ch. K., Introd., p. xxxviii.   I do not feel sure that Chall1berlain is
              right in attributing to Chinese influence the stiglua attached to unions of
              brothers and sisters of the full blood. See a paper on" The :Family and
              Relationships in Ancient Japan," in the" Transactions of the Japan Society,"
              189 2 -93.
                 ~ A somewhat different version of this poenl is given in the" Kojiki." See
              Ch. l{., p. 296. I have adopted one or two of 1\loto\vori's emendations. See
              '~Kojikiden," xxxix. 23. "Foot-dragging" is a Inakura-kotoba or conven-
              tional epithet of 1110untain, used because in ascending a mountain \ye drag one
              foot painfully after the other. At least, that is the C01111110n interpretation.
              The metre is sonle\vhat irregular nag-a-uta..
                 a i.e. incest.
                                     I~GIO.                                     J26

so the Inlperial Princess Karu no Iratsume \vas banished to
Iyo.l At this time the Heir Apparent made a song, saying:-
                        I, the (;reat Lord,
                        To an island atn banished:
                        RClnaining behind in the ship,
                         I ",ill certainly COine back again.                            X III. 16.
                         Let Illy bed be respected-
                         (In \\'ords indeed
                         I shall call it ll1y bed)
                         Let 111y spouse be respected. ~

   Again he made a song, saying:-
                      The maiden of Karu
                      (The Heaven-soaring),
                       I f she ,,,ept violently,
                      '!\fen \"ould know of it-
                      Like the doves of :\I011nt Hasa,
                      She ,veeps \vith a suppressed \veeping. a

 42nd year, Spring, 1st month, 14th day.                    The Emperor died. A,D·453-
His years ,vere many.4

    1 '[he" Kojiki " 11lakes the Prince to be banished. and Motowori thinks

with sonlC reason that this ll1ust be the true version of the story. For one
thing (he says), '''Oiuen have ahvays been more lightly punished in Japan
than men for the same offence, and the particular character of the fault in
this case lllakes such a discriu1ination all the Inore reasonable. Moreover,
it is hardly possible to construe the poenl which follo\vs other,vise than as
C0111posed by Prince Karu 'W'hen about to be banished. An ancient note to
the ~'Nihongi" (see belo\\') speaks of the Prince as having died by his o\vn
hand in Iyo.
    2 The word for bed is tatailli, no\v applied to the thick mats used to cover
the floor of a Japanese house. At this time the tata111i only covered the
sleeping-place. There ,,,as a superstition forbidding people to 111eddle with
the bed of an absent person, as to do so ,,"auld bring do,,-n calaJnity on hiln.
The \vord translated" respect "is YUine, tabQo, religious abstinence. The
third line of this poem is literally'; a ship-renlaincier,'~ by \\ hieh is understood
" one ,vho remains behind in a ship after the other passengers have landed.::
There arc, ho,ve\~er, other explanations. See eh. ]~., p. 300.
   3 The 111etre of this paetH is irregular. "Hea\~cn soaring" is a conven-
tional epithet applied to Karu, ,vhich is the nalne of a place, because Kari
l11eans It. a ,vild goose "--hardly a sufficient reason to our \Vcstern Ininds.
   .. Sc\'enty·cight, says the" Kojiki." Another authority says eighty. But
his Inother, the Empress Iha no hime, died A.D. 347, and she had ceased to
cohabit with her husband A. D. 342 (see abovc, p. 285), so that he \vould be
at least I 10 at the titHc of his death.
         3 26                            NIHONGI.

             Now the King of Silla, when he heard that the Emperor
          had died, was shocked and grieved, and sent up eighty tribute
          ships with eighty musicians of all kinds. They anchored at
          Tsushima, and made great ,vail. When they arrived in
          Tsukushi they again made great \vail. Anchoring in the
          harbour of Naniha, they all put on plain white garments, and
          bringing all the articles of tribute, and stringing their musical
          instruments of all kinds, they proceeded from Naniha to the
          capital. 1 Sometimes they wept and wailed, sometimes they
          sang and danced, until at length they assembled at the Shrine
          of temporary interment.
             Winter, loth month, loth da)r. The Emperor ,vas buried in
          the misasagi of Naga-no no hara in Kahachi.
XIII. 17.    11th month. The Silla messengers of condolence, ,vhen the
          funeral ceremonies were concluded, returned home.
             Now the men of Silla had al\vays loved Mount ~fiminashi
          and Mount Unebi, \vhich are hard by the capital city. Accord-
          ingly, when they arrived at the Kotobiki, Hill, they looked back,
          and said :-" Uneme haY'a! Mimi haya!" This was simply
          because they \\~ere unpractised in the common speech, and
          therefore corrupted 110unt Unebi, calling it Uneme, and cor-
          rupted l\1ount l\:fiminashi, calling it Mimi. Now the Yamato
          no Muma-kahi 2 Be, \vho \\Tere in attendance on the men of
          Silla, heard these \:vords, and conceived a suspicion that the
          Silla men had had intercourse \\rith the Uneme. So they made
          them go back, and gave information to the Imperial Prince
          Ohohatsuse. The Imperial Prince straightway threw the Silla
          messengers ever~y one i11to prison, and put them to an examina-
          tion. Then the Silla messengers made a statement, saying:-
          " We have done the Uneme no harm. Our words \vere simply
          expressive of our loye for the t,vo mountains close to the
          capital." Upon this it ,vas recognized that the charge was
          groundless, and the}~ ,vere all released. But the people of
          Silla resented it greatly', and further reduced the kinds of
          articles sent as tribute and the number of ships.

                J   Anaho in Y"alnato.              ~   H orse-kc~pers.
Csa




      M isasaei o f Ιησ ίδ T en n o,
        "'~8
        J-                                NIHONGI.


                                  THE EMPEROR ANAHO.

                                   (ANKOI TE1VNo.)

          The Emperor Anaho was the second child of the Emperor
        W o-asa-tsnma waku-go no Sukune.
                  One account says :-" The third child."
Xl]]. 18.   His mother's name was Osaka no Oho-nakatsu-hime no
          Mik-oto. She was the daughter of the Imperial Prince Waka-
          nuke-futa-mata.:
            The Emperor died in the 42nd year of his reign, Spring, the
          1st month. In Winter, the loth month, the funeral cere-
          monies -were completed. At this time the Heir Apparent was
          guilty of a barbarous outrage in debauching a ,voman. The
          nation censured him, and the Ministers would not follow him,
          but all \vithout exception gave their allegiance to the Imperial
          Prince Anaho. Hereupon the Heir Apparent wished to attack
          the Imperial Prince Anaho, and to that end secretly got ready
          an army. The Imperial Prince Anaho also raised a force, and
          prepared to give battle. It ,vas at this time that the terms
          " Anaho arrow-notch" and" Karu arrow-notch" 3 b~gan. N O\V
          the Heir Apparent, knowing that the Ministers \vould not follow
          him, and that the people were uncompliant, ,vent a\\~ay and hid
          in the house of the ~1ononobe, Ohomahe no Sukune. The
          Imperial Prince Anaho, hearing this, forth\vith surrounded it.
          Ohomahe no Sukune came forth froin the gate to meet him,
          upon ,,-hich the Imperial Prince Anaho made a song, sa)ling : -
                                  To Oho-mahe
                                  Wo-mahe 4 Sukune's
                                  Metal-gate's shelter,
                                  Thus let us repair,
                                  And ,vait till the rain stops.

            1 Anko Ineans peace.                ~ A son of Ojin. See Ch. K., p. 242.
            3 The parallel passage of the " Kojiki " (Ch. K., p. 298) has "inside" for

        "notch," and an ancient note explains that in the case of Prince Karu's
        arro,vs, the "notch" or "inside" \\·as of copper, \vhereas those of Prince
        Anaho '\\'ere " like those of the present titlle," i.e. presumably afiran. J\!toto-
        \vori thinks that the arrow-points are intended.
            " It is a question ,,-hether Oho-luahe and Wo-mahe are one person or
        t,,·o brothers. The metre of this poeln is imperfect Tanka.
                                   Α ν κο.                                329

  Ohomahe no Sukune made a song in answer, saying : -

                      Because the courtier's                                      XIII. 19·
                      C;arter·bell
                      Has fallen off,
                      The courtiers make a noise:
                      Ye country-folks also be\vare! (of ll1aking a noi~e) 1


   So he addressed the Imperial Prince, saying :-" I beseech
thee, harm not the Heir Apparent. Thy servant will advise with
him." Accordingly the Heir Apparent died by his own hand in
the house of Ohomahe no Sukune.
         One account says that he was banished to the Land of
       Iyo.2
   I2th month, 14th da)y. The Imperial Prince Anaho assuIIled
the Imperial Dignity, and the Empress was honoured \vith the
title of "Grand Empress." The capital was forthwith removed
to Isonokami.:i It ,vas called the Palace of Anaho.
   At this time the Imperial Prince Ohohatsuse wished to
betroth to him the daughters of the Emperor Midzuha-
wake. 4
    ~ The na1l1CS of these daughters are not found i1/ any ~f the
records.J
   Hereupon the Inlperial Princesses ans\vered and said:-
" Thou, my Lord, art much given to violence, and to sudden
fits of anger, so that he ,'rho sees thee in the morning is slain in
the evening, and he who sees thee in the evening is slain in the
morning. No\v, thy handmaidens' countenances are not dis-
tinguished for beauty', nor their minds for cleverness. If in
manners and speech \ve should be no whit agreeable to the
princely expectation, ho\v shouldst thou receive us to thy
intimacy? For this reason \ve are unable to obey thy com-

  1 This   is supposed to contain a renlonstrance addressed to Prinrc
Anaho's party for tuaking a fuss about such a s111all luatter as the escape
of Prince Karu, ,,,hlCh is c0111pared to the loss of the grclot of a courtier's
garter.
  2 This is the " Kojiki ;, yersian.

  a In Yalnato.
  " He died A.D. 41 I, at the age of 60, so these princesses \vere no", (.\.D.
453) not exactly young. They were his cousins by the father's side.
         33°                                  NIHONGI.

          mands." To the last the:y kept out of his ,vay, and would not
          give ear to him. l
A.D. 454·    1st ~year, Spring, 2nd month, 1st day. On behalf of the
          Imperial Prin~e Ohohatsuse the Emperor desired to betroth to
XIII. 20. him the Imperial Princess Hata-hi, a younger sister of the
          Imperial Prince Ohokusaka,' and for this purpose sent Ne no
          Omi, ancestor of the Omi of Sakamoto, to request her of the
          Imperial Prince Ohokusaka, saying :-" I beseech thee let me
          have the Imperial Princess Rata-hi, whom I desire to espouse
          unto the Imperial Prince Ohohatsuse." Hereupon the Imperial
          Prince Ohokusaka answered and said :-" Thy servant has for
          some time suffered from a severe illness, ,vhich cannot be healed.
          He may' be compared to a ship \vhich has taken in its cargo
          and is ,vaiting for the tide. Death, however, is our destiny;
          and there is no sufficient reason for regret. Only I cannot die
          in peace because my y'ounger sister, the Imperial Princess
          Hata-hi, ,viII be left alone and unprotected. If now Your
          l\Iajest)r ,viII not loathe her for her ugliness, and \viII allow her
          to complete the number of the duck\veed flo\vers,3 it ,viII be a
          matter for the deepest gratitude. Ho,v should I decline the
         favour of th)T c0111mands?                In order, therefore, to show my

            1 This and 111any other stories in the " 1\ ihongi~' sho\\" that the position of

         '''Olnen in these tlnles ,,"as by no l11eans one of abject dependence on their
         tnale relatives.
            ~ They ,vere children of the Eillperor Nin10ku, ,vho died A.D. 399,
         aged 12:!. The H Shukai:' suggests that the Prince and Princess here
         nanled ,,-ere grandchildren, and not children of !\intoku, but the more
         obvio~)s explanation of the difficulty is that the chronology is entirely
         untrust\\"orthy.
            :i " ..- \n aquatic plant \yith peltate floating leaves, prohably a Lelunanthe-

         111Ulll, or lllarsh·flo"·cr." \Villiaills. The allusion is to the opening stanzas of
         the first ode of the She-king, translated by 1)r. Legge as fo11o\vs : -

                       A"''Zt 1all, KrzlJllll go the ospreys
                        On the islet in the river.
                        The 111odest, retiring, vi'rtuous, young lady : -
                        For our prince a good Inate is she.

                        Here long, there short, is the duckweed
                        To the left, to the right, borne about by the current.
                       The Inodest. retiring, Yirtuolls, young lady : -
                       \\.aking and sleeping he ~oL1ght her.
                                A n ko .                             33 1
sincerity, I offer thee my private treasure, called the Oshiki 1
jewel head-dress [others say' standing head·dress,' and others,
again, Ihaki (rock-tree) head-dress], which I make so bold as
to present to thee by the hand of Ne no Omi, the minister
whom thou didst send to me. I beg thee to accept of it,
although it is an object of no value, as a token of my good
faith."
   Hereupon N e no Omi, when he saw the Oshiki jewel head-
dress, was struck with its beauty, and the thought occurred to
him of stealing it and making it his own treasure. So he falsely
represented to the Emperor, saying :-" The Imperial Prince
Ohokusaka refused to obey thy orders, and spake to thy
 servant, saying :-' Shall he, though of the same house, have my XIII. 21.
younger sister to wife? ' " Having done so, he retained the
jewel head-dress, and did not present it to the Emperor, but
made it his own.
    Hereupon the Emperor believed Ne no Omi's slanderous
 words, and was greatly \vroth. He raised an armed force, with
 which he surrounded the house of the Imperial Prince Oho-
 kusaka and slew him.
   At this time the Hikakas, Kishi of Naniha, father and sons,
 were all in the service of the Imperial Prince Ohokusaka, and
they were all grieved that their lord should die without a crime.
 Accordingly the father took in his arms the Prince's head and
 the two sons took up each one of the Prince's legs and cried
 aloud, saying :-" Alas! OUf Lord has died \vithout a crime.
 Were we three, father and sons, \vho served him in life, not to
 follow him in death, we should be no true retainers." So they
cut their throats, and died beside the Imperial corpse. The
 army, to a man, all wept tears. Upon this the Emperor took
 Nakashi hime/ the Imperial Prince Ohokusaka's wife, and
bestowing her within the Palace, made her his concubine.
 Ultimately he sent for the Imperial Princess Hata-hi and gave
 her to the Imperial Prince Ohohatsuse to wife.
    This year was the year Kinoye Muma (31St) of the Cycle.
    2nd year, Spring, 1st month, 17th day. Nakashi hime no A.D. 455.

  1 Oshiki Ineans literally" push-\\"ood" or "push-tree."   Its application
here is uncertain.
  :.: 'fhe " I(ojiki'~ gives here a different nan1e.
        33 2                       NIHONGI.

          Mikoto was appointed Empress. The Emperor loved her
          exceedingly.
            Before this time Nakashi hime no Mikoto bore Prince Mayu-
          wa to the Imperial Prince Ohokusaka. On his mother's account
          he escaped punishment, and was always brought up within the
          Palace.
A.n. 4:6.   3rd year, Autumn, 8th month, 9th day. The Emperor was
XIII. 22. assassinated by Prince Mayu\va [a detailed account is given in
          the history of the Emperor Ohohatsuse's reign]. After three
          years he was buried in the misasag-i of Fushimi at Sugahara.
                              BOOK XIV.
                                                                  1
            THE EMPEROR OHO-I-IATSUSE WAKATAKE.


                      (y[j.RIAKU 2 TENNo.)

THll Emperor Oho-hatsuse Waka-take       was the fifth child 3 of
the Emperor Wo-asa·tsuma Waku-go no Sukune. When the
Emperor was born, a supernatural radiance filled the building. 4
When he grew to manhood, he was distinguished for sturdy
strength.
   In the 8th month of the 3rd year of his reig-n, the Emperor
Anaho went to the Mountain Palace with the intention of
taking the hot baths. At length he went up into a lofty tower
and was enjoying the prospect. Accordingly he commanded
 sake to be brought and a banquet. to be held. So then, ,vhilst
 his mind was at ease and his pleasure at its helgllt, in the course
 of conversation he turned to the Empress and addressed her,
 sayIng : -
         [The daughter of the Emperor Izahowake was called
      the Imperial Princess N akashi hime. She was also called
      the Imperial Princess Nagata no Oho-iratsume. The
      Imperial Prince Ohokusaka, a child of the Emperor Oho-
      sazaki, took to wife the Imperial Princess Nagata, \vho
      bore to him Prince Mayuwa. Afterwards the Emperor

  I Hatsuse is the name of a place in Yamato.         Waka-take Ineans young
brave.
  2 Yii-riaku means manly stratagenl or counsel.       The e\'ents related in this
Book read more like genuine history, and the chronoloJY, though it stiil
leaves nluch to be desired, j's 110t so wildly inaccurate as before.
  :. He was really the fifth son. See above, p. 3 I 5.
   4 The saine thing in nearly the saIne ,yords is related of one of the Later

 Han Emperors of China.
       33-t                              NII-IONGI.

                 Anaho, giving heed to the slander of Ne no ami, put to
                 death the Imperial Prince Ohokusaka and appointed the
                 Imperial Princess N akashi hime Empress. An account of
                 this is given in the history of the reign of Anaho Tenno.:
           '" Our younger sister" [it seems to have been the ancient custom
           to address one's \vife as "younger sister "], "although thou
           art Our friend, We fear Prince Mayuwa.. " Now Prince Mayuwa
           -who was only a boy-was playing below the tower, and heard
           everything that was said. Afterwards the Emperor Anaho,
           making a pillow of the Empress's knees, fell asleep in daylight
X 1\:". 2. drunkenness. Hereupon Prince Mayuwa, watching the. time
           when he was sound asleep, stabbed and murdered him. On
           this day one of the Oho-toneri ran [his name and surname
           are wanting lJ, and said to the Emperor 2:-" The Emperor
           Anaho has been murdered by Prince Mayuwa." The Emperor
           was greatly shocked, and straightway being suspicious of his
           elder brothers, put on his arnlour and girded himself with his
           sword. Taking command of his troops in person, he urgently
           questioned the Imperial Prince Yatsuri no Shiro-hiko. The
            Imperial Prince, seeing that he wished to do him a mischief,
            sat silent and said not a word. So the Emperor drew his
           sword and slew him. Next he urgently questioned the Imperial
            Prince Sakahi no Kurohiko. But this Imperial Prince also
            knew that he was about to do him a mischief, and sat silent,
            sa)Ting not a word.:i The Emperor's rage became still more
            violent, so with the further object of killing Prince Mayuwa as
            well, he examined him as to the reason of his conduct. Prince
            Mayuwa said :-" Thy servant has never sought the Celestial
            Dignity. He has only revenged himself on his father's enemy."
            The Imperial Prince Sakahi no Kurohiko, who feared pro..
            foundly the suspicion in which he was held, communicated
            secretly with Prince Mayuwa, and they at last found an oppor-
Xl\~. 3. tunity of getting away together. They fled to the house of the
            Oho-ami I Tsubura. The Emperor sent a messenger to ask

          1 This note is rejected by the" Shukai "edition. It is certainly frivolous.
          ~ i.e. to the E1l1perOr yuriaku.              ,
          3 The" Kojiki" relates these e\'ents quite differently.
         .. Oho..omi is \vritten \vith the characters read in later times Daijin, i.e.
        Great Minister or Prime Minister.
                                   YUH.IA.I{ C.                        335
for them. The Oho-ami replied by a messenger, saying:-
" I may possibly have heard of a vassal in time of trouble taking
refuge in a Royal chamber, but I had never seen Princes con-
ceal themselves in the house of a vassal. At this very time the
Imperial Prince Sakahi no Kurohiko and Prince Mayuwa,
trusting profoundly in thy servant's heart, have come to th)T
servant's house. How can I ha\~~ the heart to send them to
thee? "     In consequence of this the Emperor raised a still
greater army and surrounded the Oho-omi's house. The Oho-
 omi came out, and standing in the courtyard, tied his garters.
 At this time the Oho-omi's wife brought the garters, and heart-
 broken, alas! made a song, saying 1:_

                            The Olni child
                            Cloth trousers
                            N~e-fold having put on--
                            Standing in the courtyard
                            His garters he adjusts!

   The Oho-omi, when he had finishe(} dressing, advanced to
the gate of the camp, where he knelt down and said :-" Thy
servant cannot obey thy orders, even though his refusal costs him
his life. There is a saying of a man of old, 'The will of even a
common man cannot be taken from him.' 2 This is precisely
thy servant's case. I humbly beseech the Great Prince to
allo,v thy servant's daughter, Kara-hime, and the seven build-
ings a of Katsuraki, ,vhich I now offer thee, to be received as a
ransom for their offences." The Emperor would not permit XIV. 4.
it, but set fire to the houses and burnt them. Hereupon the
Oho-omi with the Imperial Prince Kurohiko and Prince Mayuwa
were all burnt to death together. Now Nihe no Sukune, Muraji
of the Sakahi Be, took In his arms the Imperial Prince's dead
 body and so \\Tas burnt to death. His household [the names are
 wanting 4J took up that which was burnt, but were never able to
 sort out the bones. They were deposited in one coffin and

   I    This poem seems intended to express \vonder at her husband's care for
 his appearance at a moment when his life \vas at stake.
   2 a Confucian 4-\.nalects," Book IX. chap. xxv. I.
   3 Granaries~ as the" Kojiki " infonns us.
   oj   A silly note.   No wonder the" Shukai " edition rejects it.
        J26                            N II-IONGI.
        buried together on the hill south of Tsukimoto In Imaki no
        Aya. 1
           Winter loth month, 1st day. The Emperor resellted the
         Emperor Anaho's having formerly wished to transfer the king-
        dom to the Imperial Prince Ichinobe no Oshiha,2 and to
        commit the succession definitively to his charge. So he
        sent a man to the Imperial Prince Ichinobe no Oshiha, and
        treacherously arranged with him to go a-hunting. Inviting
        llim to go on an excursion to the moors, he said :-I{ara-
        bukuro,3 the Kimi of the Sasaki mountain in Ohomi, tells me
XIV. 5· that now on the Kaya moor in Kutawata in Ohomi, there are
        wild boars and deer in plenty. The horns they bear are like
        the twigs of withered trees, their legs are thick together like a
        grove of bushes, the breath \\Thich they breathe resembles the
        mists of morning. Along with the Imperial Prince, I wish in
        the first month of \\,inter, \\,hen the sky is cloudy and the cold
        wind blows keenly, to go for an excursion to the moors, where
        \ve may some\\That divert our minds by running archery." 4 The
        Imperial Prince Ichinobe no Oshiha accordingly followed the
        hunt. Hereupon the Emperor Ohohatsuse drew his bow and
        putting his horse to a gallop, called out falsely, saying, "There is
        a wild hoar! " and shot the Imperial Prince Ichinobe no Oshiha-
        dead. A man of the Imperial Prince's household named U ruwa,
        of the Saheki Be [another name is Nakachiko], took the dead
        body in his arms. In his consternation he knew not what to
        do, but writhed on the ground and called aloud upon his master,
        going to and fro. The Emperor put him to death also.
           In this month the Imperial Prince Mimiima,o who had
        formerly been pleased with Musa, a place belonging to the
Xl". 6. I{imi of Miwa, and wishing to shake off his cares, went thither.
        \Vhile on his way ,he unexpectedly fell in with a force which
        had been sent against him. 6 He joined battle with them at the

         I   This means literally the ne\\'-corner Aya or Han. See belo\\', xix. 22.
         :!  The eldest son ofRichlu Tenno. See p. 306. He was, no doubt, thought
       too young to succeed to the throne at his father's death in 405.
         J l{ara bag.    There is also a name Yamato-bukuro.
         4 i.e. shoojng animals with the bo\y and arro\v \vhile one~s horse is at a

       gallop.
         ,') The Prince of the august horses. A son of Richiu Tenno.
         /) By the Enlpcror.
                               YUHJAKU.                                 337
,,'ell of Iha in Mi,,"a, but ,vas soon taken prisoner. "Then about
to be executed, he pointed to the "veIl and pronounced a curse,
say'ing :-" This water may be drunk by the people only: royal
persons alone may not drink of it."
    11th month, 13th da~y. The Emperor ordered commissioners
to erect a lofty pavilion at Asakura in Hatsuse,t in V\rhich he
assumed the Imperial Dignity, and at last established the
Palace. He appointed Matori, Heguri no Omi as Oho-omi and
~Iuruya, Oho-tomo no Muraji' and lYle, 1\fononobe no Muraji he
 made Ohomuraji. 2
    1st year, Spring, 3rd month, 3rd da)r. The Imperial Princess A.D. 457·
 Kusaka no Hatahi hime ,vas appointed Empress. [Another
 name for her is Tachi-bana-hime.]
    In this month three concubines ,vere appointed. The senior
of these, named Kara-hime, daughter of the Oho-omi of
Tsubura in Katsuraki t was the mother of the Emperor Shiraga
take-hiro-kuni-oshi Waka-Yamato-neko, and of the Imperial
 Princess \Vaka-tarashi-hime.         [Also called the Imperial
 Princess Taku.. hata no Iratsume.] This Imperial Princess
attended to the sacrifices of the Great Deity of Ise. 3 Next XIV. 7.
there was 'Vaka-hime, daughter of the Omi of Kibi
no Kamutsumichi." [One book says she ,vas the daughter of
 I{ibi no Kuboya no Omi.] She bore two sons. The elder \vas
called the Imperial Prince Ihashiro, and the younger the
 Imperial Prince Hoshikaha no Waka-miya. Next there was
\Vaguna Kimi, daughter of Fukame, Omi of Wani in Kasuga.
 She was the mother of Princess Kasuga no Oho-iratsume [also
called Princess Takahashi.] Woguna Kimi was originally an
 Uneme. The Emperor gave one night to her and she became
pregnant. Ultimately she gave birth to a girl. The Emperor
 had suspicions and \vould not bring her up. When the girl was
able to ,valk, the Emperor was in the great hall with the Oho-
 muraji Me, of the Mononobe, in attendance on him. The girl

  1  The interlinear kana gloss has Hase.
  2  The" Shokugensho " says :-" The prilne Minister (Oho-omi or Daijin)
conducts the Government in conjunction \vith the Ohomuraji." Another
authority says that the Oho-olni ,vas a civil and the Oholnuraji a nlilitary
officer. The titles \vere hereditary in these Houses. They became extinct
to\\'ards the end of the sixth century.
   3 The Sun..Goddess.               4 The upper province of Kibi, now Dizen.
         J26                          NIIIONGI.

           crossed the courtyard. Me, the Ohomuraji, looking round, said
           to the Ministers :_H What a pretty girl! There is a saying of
           the men of old, 'Thou art like thy mother.' 1 [This ancient
           saying is not clear.] Whose little girl is she said to be who is
           walking with leisurely pace in the pure court?" The Emperor
           said :--" Why dost thou ask?" Me no Ohomuraji answered
           and said :-" When thy servant looks at this little girl walking,
           she appears to him strongly to resemble the Emperor." The
           Emperor said :-" Everyone who sees her makes the same
           remark. Sed insolitum est, quum ei unam solum noctem
           dederim, earn concepisse et filiam peperisse. Quam ob rem
           suspiciones mihi excitatae sunt." Ohomuraji dixit :-" Sed in
           hac una nocte quoties cum eA rem habuisti?" "Septies," in-
 XIV. 8. quit Imperator. Ohomuraji loquitur :-" Si haec femina puro
           corpore et pura mente recepit unam noctem quanl ei dedisti, cur
           tam facile concipis suspiciones et nolis fidere alterius castitati?
           Servus tUllS audivit feminas quae facile praegnantes fiant vel
           tactu braccarum concipere. M nlto magis, quum totam noctem
           dederis, sine justa ratione non debes suspiciones concipere."
              The Emperor, by order to the Ohomuraji, made the little
           girl an Imperial Princess, and appointed her mother to be a
            concubine.
              This year was the year Hinoto Tori (34th) of the Cycle.
A.D. 45 8•    2nd year, Autumn, 7th month. Iketsu hime of Pekche,2 in
            despite of the Emperor's intention to favour 3 her, had an
            amour with Tate of Ishikaha.
                   In an old book it is said :-" Tate, the ancestor of the
                 Obita of Momoahi in Ishikaha."
            The Emperor was greatly enraged, and giving his commands
            to the Ohomuraji Muruya, of the Ohotomo House, sent some
            Kume Be who stretched the four limbs of the woman on a tree.
            The tree was placed over a cupboard, which was set fire to,
            and she was burnt to death.
                   The " Shinsen ", of Pekche says :-" In the 6th year of

           1These words are in Japanese.
           2Corea has been hardly mentioned for fifty years or so. Probably
         some of the events allotted to the previous period really belong to this
         interval.
           3   i.e. wed.              4   i.e. new con"lpilation, the name of a book.
                                YUH.IAKU.                                 339
     the Cycle I King I~ero ascended the throne. The Emperor
     sent Aretoku hither to ask for a nyorang. Pekche adorned
     the daughter of the Lady Moni, called the Nyorang Ch6k-
     ke, and sent her as tribute to the Emperor." 2
  Winter, loth month,3rd day. The Emperor made a pro-
gress to the Palace of Yoshino, and on the 6th he proceeded to
Mimase. Giving orders to the wardens, he indulged in the
chase. They climbed the towering peaks, they crossed the
wide jungles. Before the shadows fell, out of ten, seven or XIV. 9.
eight had been caught. Every time they 11unted, they caught
many, so that the birds and beasts were almost exhausted.
At length they rested by the springs and groves, and sauntered
together in the thickets and meadows. Halting his footmen,
the Emperor counted the chariots and horses. Then he in-
quired of the Ministers, saying :-" It is a pleasure of the hunt-
ing-field to make the stewards cut up the fresh meat. Suppose
that you and \Ve cut it up ourselves?" The Ministers were
taken aback and could find no answer. Hereupon the Emperor
became very wroth, and drawing his sword, slew one of the
stewards named Mumakahi of Ohotsu. On this day the
Imperial cortege arrived from the Yoshino Palace. The people
of the province all shook with fear. In consequence the
Grand Empress and the Empress, hearing of this, were full of
apprehension, and sent to meet him Hi-no-hime, the Uneme of
Yamato,3 to offer him sake. The Emperor, seeing the beauty
of the Uneme's countenance;' and the elegance of her appear-
ance, softened his looks, and with a pleased expression, said :--
" How should I not \vish to behold thy pleasing snlile ?" So

   1 Corresponding to A.D. 429. 1"he "Tongkalll;' places this event in A.D. 455.
   2 The use of the words" Emperor ;, and "tribute" shows that this" new
compilation," like the "Pekehe record" already mentioned, was probably
the \vork of Corean literati dOlniciled in Japan. ~yorang is in the Chinese
tJ:. ~B (lady), \vhich in modern Japanese nleans a harlot. The
I nterlinear Kana is Yehashito, ,vhich probably means "beautiful person."
The nyorang were no doubt concubines of inferior rank. The \\Tord rendered
lady is 4~ A, a title of the wives of officials above a certain rank.
Aretoku is not like a Japanese name.
   3 The Atahe of 'l amato ""as her father.

   4 She ,vas of a nlarriageable age before the accession of Richiu Tenno in
 A.D. 400, and we are no\v at 45 8.
        J26
        340                            N II-ION(;I.
XIV. 10. hand in hand \vith her, he entered the hinder palace, ,\\rhere he
         addressed the Empress Do,vager, saying :-" In to-clay's hunt
         we took many birds and beasts. "T e '\\rished along with the
         Ministers to cut up the fresh meat and to have a banquet on
         the moor. But having proposed this to them, not one of them
         gave us an answer. Therefore did \Ve get angry." The
         Empress Dowager, knowing the feeling \\Thich dictated these
         words of the Emperor, mollified him, saying :-" The Ministers
         did not understand that your Majesty, in connection with the
         sport on the hunting-field, ,vas establishing a Fleshers' Be, and
         therefore did condescend to ask their opinion, so that their
         silence was reasonable, and it was hard for them to reply.
         But even now it is not too late to offer them! I will make a
         beginning with myself. My steward Nagano is good at making
         mince meat. 2 I beg permission to present him to thee." The
         Emperor knelt down and accepted him, saying :-" It is good."
         This is what the rustic means when he says :-" The nobles
         understand each other's hearts." The Empress Dowager saw
         the Emperor's gratification, and pleasure filled her bosom. She
         further wished to offer men, and said :-" There are nlY two
         scullions, Masakida and Takame,3 of the Mito Be of Uda. I
         beg leave to add these two men to the others to form a
         Fleshers' Be." From this time forward Akoko no Sukune,
         the Miyakko of the province of Yamato, sends some of the
                                                          J
XIV. II. Kotori Wake of Saho to form the Fleshers Be. The Omi, the
         Muraji, the Torno no Miyakko, and the Runi no Miyakko also,
         following (the En1press's example), presented some, one after
         another.
            In this month the Funlubito 4 Be, and the Toneri i Be of
         Kahakami, were instituted.
            The Emperor, taking his heart for guide, wrongfully slew
         many men. The Empire censured him, and called him " The
         greatly wicked Emperor." The only persons who loved him
          1   Men to serve as fleshers.
          2   It Inust be remembered that the Japanese having no table· knives, all
        flesh is cut up small before it is served.
           3 A curious name!     It means" High Heaven." Uda is the name of a
        Kori of Yamato. There is a vil1a~e there caned Mitobe, \vhich means
        Imperial House Be. It probably \yas an appanage of the Empress.
           .. Scribes.                             i Palace attendants.
                                 YURIAKU.                                 34 1
were Awo Musa no Suguri 1 of the Scribes' Be and Hakatoko,
 Hinokuma no Tami-tsukahi.'
   3rd year, Summer, 4th nlonth. Kunimi, Abe no Omi [His A.D. 459·
-other name was Shikotohi], uttered a slander respecting the
Imperial Princess Taku-hata and Takehiko, Ihoki Be no Muraji,
the bath-official, saying :-" Takehiko has had illicit intercourse
with the Imperial Princess." Takehiko's father, Kikoyu, hear-
ing this rumpur, was afraid lest calamity might overtake him- XIV. 12.
self, and persuaded Take-hiko to come with hirr! to the River
 Ihoki. Tllere, pretending to make cormorants dive into the
water to catch fish, he took him unawares and slew him. When
the Emperor heard this, he sent messengers to question the
 Imperial Princess. The Imperial Princess answered and said:-
 "Thy handmaiden knows nothing." Suddenly the Imperial
 Princess took a divine mirror and ,vent to Isuzu no Kahakami,3
and watching for a time \vhen no one ,vas passing, buried the
mirror, anti hanged herself. The Emperor became suspicious
on account of the Imperial Princess's absence, and constantly
sent persons in the dead of night to search in all directions.
 When they caIne to I{ahakami, a rainbow appeared, like unto a
serpent, four or five rods in length. When they dug the place
from \vhich the rainbow sprang they found the divine mirror,
and no great distance off, tlley discovered the Imperial
 Princess's body. On ripping her open and making examina-
tion, there was in her belly something like water, and in the
water there was a stone. I(ikoyu ,vas thus enabled to establish
 his son's innocence, but on the other hand he had remorse for
 having slain him. He revenged him by killing Kunimi, and
then fled and hid in the Shrine of Isonokami.
   4th year, Spring, 2nd month. The Emperorwent a-hunting A.D. 460•
with bow and arrows on !vIount I{atsuraki. Of a sudden a tall XIV. 13·
 man appeared, who came and stood over the vermilion valley."'


   1 Suguri is written ,vith Chinese characters \vhich mean" village ll1aster."

It is said to be a Corean \\rord.
  ~ Talni.tsukahi Ineans ,. enlployer of the people." It seelns to be a title
of a low class. It lnay be obser,"ed that the " Kojiki H strives to put a
favourable construction on Yllriaku's conduct.
   :1 Where the Ise shrines are.

  -I Fairy-land.   It is perhaps here the nalne of a place, Tanikahi.
        34
        J262                            NIHONGI.

        In face and demeanour he resembled the Emperor.               The
          EInperor knew that he ,vas a God, and therefore proceeded to
          inquire of him, saying :-" Of what place art thou Lord? 7t
          The tall man answered and said :-" I am a God of visible
          men. 1 Do thou first tell thy princely name, and then in turn I
          \vill infcrm thee of mine." The Emperor ans\vered and said : -
          "We are Wake-take no I\fikoto." The tall man next gave his
          name, saying :-" Thy servant is the God Hito-koto-nushi.":
          He finally joined him in the diversion of the chase. They
          pursued a deer, and each declined in favour of the other to let
          fly an arrow at him. The~y galloped on, bit to bit, using to one
          another reverent and respectful language, as if in the company
          of genii. Here,vith the sun went do,vn, and the hun·t came to
          an end. The God attended on the Emperor and escorted him
          as far as the Water of !{ume. At this time the people all
          said :-" An Emperor of great virtue! "
             Autumn, 8th month, r8th day. The Emperor made a
          progress to the Palace of Yoshino.
             ~8th day.    He made a progress to Kahakami no Ono,:Jwhere
          he commanded the forest wardens to drive the wild beasts.
          He lay in wait hoping to shoot them himself, ,vhen a gad-fly
          came swiftly flying. Then a dragon-fl~y flew thither suddenly,
          bit the gad-fly, and went away with it. The Emperor was
          pleased at its attention, and commanded his Ministers, saying:
          - " Do ye on Our behalf compose an ode in praise of this
XI'~. 14. dragon-fly." As none of the Ministers made so bold as to COIn-
          pose an ode, the Emperor forthwith composed a short piece,'
          sayIng : -
                                 These tidings SOlne one
                                 Told in the Great Presence,
                                 Ho\v in Yamato
                                 On the Peak of Womura
                                 Four-footed game was lying:


          1 i.e. who has assumed mortal {orol.
          ~ Lit. one-word-master. The" Kojiki "expands this into" The Deity "'ho
        dispels with a \vord the evil, and with a ,,·ord the good." See eh. K., P.319.
        The" Kiujiki" ll1akes him a son of Susano,,·o.
          3 The little nloor of the upper streanl.

          4 IJ ib!.   This -was the name of a particular kind of Chinese poetry of
        four or eight lines.
                               YURIAKU.                                  343
                        The Great Lord,
                        When he heard this,
                        Stood at his throne
                        Entwined with je\vels,
                        Stood at his throne
                        Entwined with cloth :
                        Waiting for the galne
                        Whilst I 1 renlained :
                        Waiting for the wild-boar
                        Whilst I was standing,
                        My arm in the fleshy part,
                        Was stung by a gad-fly:
                        But soon a dragon-fly
                        That gad-fly did bite.
                        Even a creeping insect
                        \\Taits upon the Great Lord.
                        'fhy form it ,,,,ill bear,
                         o Yamato, land of the rlragon-fly ! 2

       One book has, instead of" the great presence," " the
     great Lor<i."
       One book has, instead of" stood at his throne," " re-
     mained in his throne."
        One book has, instead of fronl " even a creeping insect "
     (inclusive) to the end, the follo\ving : -

                    That in this wise
                    I t should be famous,
                    The Heaven-filling 3
                    Land of Yalnato
                    Was called the Land of the Dragon-fly!

 Therefore in honour of the Dragon-fly this place was called
Akitsu no.~                                                  Xl\T. 15·

  1 The change from the third to the first person is much less Inarked in the

Japanese. It is not to be supposed that the Emperors actually composed
these verses thenlselves, nor perhaps any others ascribed to them in the
"Nihongi." rrhe hand of the Court-poet is plain in the honorific epithets
and forms given to him therein.
  2 The word for throne is agura.      It \vas no doubt something of the
nature of a camp-stool.
  3 Heaven-filling.   See above, p. 135, note     s. The oletre is irregular
naga-uta.
  .. This is the" Kojiki " version.
  5 The moor of the Dragon-fly.     See above, p. 134, note 8.
                                                                 A   a
             J26
             344                              N IliONGI.
A.D. 46 1.      5th year, Spring, 2nd month. The Emperor hunted on
             ~1ount Katsuraki.     Suddenly there came a supernatural bird,
             in size like a sparro\v, ,vith a long tail \vhich trailed upon the
             ground. Now this bird chirruped, saying :-" Have a care!
             Have a care!" Then suddenly there appeared, issuing furiously
             from the l1erbage, a raging wild boar of which they had been in
             chase, and pursued the men. The huntsmen in great terror
             clirrlbed up into trees. The Emperor commanded his attend-
             ants, saying :-" When a savage beast meets \vith man, it
              straightway halts. Encounter it with a shot from ~your bows,
              and then stab it." The attendants were of an effeminate
              nature. They climbed up trees, and changed countenance,
              and their five senses were masterless. The raging wild boar
              came straight on, and tried to bite the Emperor. But the
              Emperor with his bow pierced it and stayed its course. Then,
              raising his foot, he killed it with a kick. Hereupon, when the
              chase was over, he wanted to cut down the attendants. The
              attendants, when about to be executed, made a song, sa~ying:-

                                     Oh ! Iny elder brother,
                                     Thou alder-tree branch-
                                     Over Arhvo,
                                     1'0 \vhich I climbed up in flight,
                                     Dreading
XIV. 16.                             The snorting of the \vild-boar,
                                     That \vas shot
                                     By Our great Lord
                                     Who rules peacefully ~ 1

                The Empress, hearing their lament, was sorry for them, and
             tried to stay (the execution). The Emperor said :_H The

               1   This translation exactly reverses the order of the lines of the original.
             The " Kojiki " version (vide Ch. K., p. 3 18) varies sOIne\vhat. Ari\\,o I take
             (doubtfully) to be a proper name. The" I~ojiki" says that it was the
             Enlperor \vho clilnbed into the tree, and Motoori takes this view. I agree
             \vith Chamberlain that this won't do. Perhaps son1ething has been olnitted
             in the " Kojiki" narrative. l°he insertion of the single \\'ord Toneri in one
             place ,,"ould ll1ake it agree \\'ith the" Nihongi." It is not likely that a poem
             should haye been conlposed to COlll111Clnorate the Eillperor's ascent into a
             tree.
                The alder-tree branch is addre~sed as "elder brother" in gratitude for its
             protection.
                                  YURll\KU.                                   345
Ernpress is taking part, not with the Emperor, but with the
attendants." She answered and said :-" The people all say,
'His Majesty is fond of the chase, and loves game. Is not
this \vrong? ' If now Your Majesty, on account of a savage
boar, puts to death }"our attendants, Your lvlajesty is, as it
were, not different from a wolf." The Emperor with the
Empress went up into their carriage and returned home.
Amid cries of "Long live the Emperor!" he said : -
"How delightful is this! Everybody has caught game, and
We have caught good words, which We have brought back
,vith us." 1
   Summer, 4th month. Lord !(asyuni [i.e. King KeroJ of
Pekche, having learnt by rumour that Iketsu hime [viz. the
Nyorang Chok-keJ had been put to death by burning,2 held
counsel, saying :-" The ancient custom of sending tribute of
women to be made U neme is contrary' to decorum, and is
inj urious to our country's reputation. Henceforward it is
unmeet that women be sent as tribute." Accordingly he inti-
mated to his younger brother, Lord Kun:~ [i.e. Lord Kon-chi],
saying :-" Do thou go to japan,4 and serve the Emperor."
Lord Kun answered and said :-" ~fy Lord's commands must
not be disobeyed. I pray thee give nle one of thy consorts,
and then I \viII undertake this mission." Lord !{asyuni
accordingly took one of his consorts ,vho was pregnant, XIV. 17·
and having given her in marriage to Lord I{un, said:-
"The month for the delivery of this pregnant consort of
 mine has already arrived. If she should be delivered on
the journey, I pray thee place (the child) on board a ship,
and whatever place thou mayest have arrived at, cause it
to be at once sent back to this country." So at last he
took his leave, and went on his mission to the (J apanese)
Court.

     1 This passage, from "If no\v y"our l\Iajesty" do\vn         to" \vith us," is
copied, \vith a fe\v trifling alterations, (roln a Chinese book. IV[otoori dis-
lllisses the \vhole incident of the Elnpress's interference as a silly itnitation
 of Chinese lllodeis. He is doubtles~ right.
    :2 See above, p. 338.
                                         m;g
    .. J3pan is B
till 111uch later.
                   *,
   ;i The traditional Kana rendering of          (\\Jar-lord) is }{OlllUkishi.
                        or Nippon, by ,vhich nan1e this country \vas not kno\\'n
         J26                            NIHONGI.

            6th month, 1st day. The pregnant consort realized the
          words of Lord Kasy'uni, and gave birth to a child in the island
          of Kahara in Tsukushi. So this child was given the natne of
          Lord Shima. 1 Upon this Lord Kun straightway took a ship
          and sent Lord Shima to his country. He became King Mu-
          nyong. The people of Pekche call this island Chuto.~
             Autumn, 7th month. Lord Kun entered the capital. After
          this he had five children.
                 The Pekche Shinsen says :-" In the year Kanoto ushi
               (A.D•. 4618) King Kero sent his younger brother, Lord
               Konchi, to Great Wa, to wait upon the Emperor and to
               confirm the friendship of former sovereigns."
A.D 462 •    6th year, Spring, 2nd month, 4th day. The Emperor made
          an excursion to the small moor of Hatsllse. There, vie\ving the
          aspect of the hills and moors, in an outburst of feeling, he made
          a song, saying:-

                               The luountains of Hatsllse,
                                 The secluded-
                               They stand out
                               Excellent Inoulltains !
                               They run out
                               Excellent moun taillS !
                               The luountains of Hatsuse,
                                  '[he secluded --
                               Are full of various beauties!
                               A re full of various beauties! -l

          Hereupon he gave a name to the small moor, and called it
         Michi no Ono. a

           1 Shima is the Japanese for island.    The Corean is syonl, the two "'ords
        being no doubt identical. See" Early Japanese History" in " T.A.S.J.,>=
        Vol. XVI. i. p. 68.
          2 Master-island.

          3 This date is noteworthy as being the first in the " Nihongi "\vhich is

        confirmed by Corean history. It is true that it occurs only in a note t
        which \vas probably added by a later hand. But the narrative of the text
        no doubt refers to the same ey'ent. From this time fOf\vard the" Nihongi U
        chronology is never grossly inaccurate, though it would be too much to say
        that it can yet be depended 011. See" Early ] apanese History" in
        "T.A.S.].," XVI. i. p. 67.
          .. Metre irregular.              0 i.e. the slnall moor of the road.
                                 YURIAKU.                                  347
   3rd month, 7th day. The Emperor wished to make the XI\? 18.
Empress and his concubines plant mulberry trees with their
own hands, in order to encourage the silk industry'. Hereupon
he gave orders to Sukaru [This is a personal name] to make a
collection of silkworms throughout the country. N O\V Sukaru
made a mistake and collected babies,l which he presented to
the Emperor. The Emperor laughed greatly, and gave the
babies to Sukaru, saying :-" Do thou bring them up thyself."
Accordingly Sukaru brought them up hard by the Palace
enclosure. So he was granted a title, and was called Chihisako
Be 2 no Muraji.
   Summer, 4th month. The Land of Wu 3 sent envoys witll
tribute.
   7th y·ear, Autumn, 7th month, 3rd da~y. The Emperor A.D. 463.
commanded Sukaru Chihisako Be no Muraii, saying :-" It is
our desire to see the form of the Deity of Mimuro Hill. [S"ome
say that tIle Deiiy of this mountain is Oho-111ono-s!liro-1Ztlsh£ 1/0
Kal1li. Others say Uda no ~'umi-zaka no Ka11li.] Thou dost
excel in strength of bod)r. Go thyself, seize him, and bring
him here." Sukaru answered and said :-" I \vill make the
attempt, and go to seize him." So he ascended the Hill of
Mimuro and caught a great serpent, which he showed the
Emperor, ,vho had not practised (religious) abstinence. Its
thunder rolled, and its eyeballs flamed. The Emperor was
afraid, and, covering his eyes, would not look upon it, but fled
into the interior of the Palace. Then he caused it to be
let loose on the Hill, and giving it a ne\v name, called it
Ikadzuchi. 4
   8th month. One of the Toneri named Oho-sora,s of the Bow- Xl''". 19.
   1 The Japanese for silk\\·orm is Kahiko.    Kahi 111eans to keep, to nurture,
and ko is " little one;" so there was SOlne excuse for Sukaru's nlistake.
                                    n
   2 Chihisako means" little child.    1 he title and office seenl ulerged in one
here.
   a The Wu dynasty came to an end A.D. 280, and at this tilue the Sung
dynasty held rule, but, as Mr. E. H. Parker has pointed out, \Vu \\'as also a
territorial designation of that part of China about Nanking. Of course, by
tribute is meant presents. The Japanese early adopted the Chinese
arrogant \vay of speaking of foreign nations.
   4 Thunderbolt.

   & Dho-sora Ineans The Great Void (of Heaven).        We have had above a
nanle Takama, i.e. Hi~h Hea\'en.
        J26                               NIHONGI.

         makers' Be of !(ibi, \vent home on some urgency. Sakitsuya
         Omi of Lo\ver Kibi ~In one book it says :-" The I\.uni no
         1vliyakko, Yama, Kibi no Omi "], detained Oho-sora, and for
         several tnonths wOl~ld not consent to allow him to go up to the
         capital. The Emperor sent Mike no Kimi, a man of valour, to
         fetch him. Dho-sora came in obedience to the summons, and
         said :-" Sakitsuya took young girls to represent the Emperor's
         men, and grown-up women to represent his own men. Then
         he made them fight ~'ith one another, and on seeing that the
         young girls were victorious, drew his sword and slew them. At
         another time he took a small cock, which he called the
         Emperor's cock, and pulled out its feathers and clipped its
         \vings. Then he took a large cock, which he called his o\vn
         cock, attached to it abell, 1 and armed its spurs \vith metal.
         Then he matched them together, and when the naked bird got
         the better of the other, he again took out his sword and killed
         it." When the Emperor heard this story, he sent thirty
         soldiers of the Monona Be, who put Sakitsuya to death~ \vith
         seventy persons of his household.
            This year Tasa, Omi of Upper Kibi, "rhile on duty beside
         the Palace, praised 'Vaka-hime abundantly to his friends,
XIV. 20. sayj'ng :-" Of all the beautiful women in the Empire, there is
         none to compare \vith my wife. How blooming! How
         gentle! How graced ,vith various charms! How radiant!
          Ho\v genial! vVhat perfection in every feature! She uses
         not flower of lead: 2 she adds not oil of orchids. Through
         the wide ages her equals are but few: in the present day she
         stands alone and peerless." The Emperor inclined his- ear,
         and listening from a distance, rejoiced in his heart. So \vith
         the object of obtaining vVaka-hime for himself, and making
         her one of his concubines, he appointed Tasa Governor of
         Inlna':i and promptly favoured Waka-hime. When Ta5a no Omi
         wedded vVaka-hime, she bore to him Ye-kimi and Oto-killli." -4
                  Another book says :-" Tasa no Omi's \vife, b)~ name

           1 Sll1all bells like the French grelots ,vere used as ornanlents to the \vrist

        or attached to garters.
          ~ \\,Thite lead ceruse.
          :i ~lilnana or Kara in Corea, ,,"here there ,vas a Japanese resident.

          oj Elder lord and younger lord.
                                 YURIAI{U.                                349
     Ke-hime, \\"as the daughter of Tamado no Sukune, son of
     Katsuraki no Sotsnhiko. The Emperor, hearing of the
     serene beauty of her form, sle\v her husband, and \vedded
     her himself."
   After Tasa had arrived at his post, he learnt that the
Emperor had married his wife, and with the object of obtaining
succour, he went to Silla, which at that time did not do service
to the Central Land. l The Emperor gave orders to Tasa no
Gmi·s son Otokimi, and also to Akawo Kibi no Ama ~ no
Atahe, saying :-" Do ye go and chastise Silla." At this time
a skilled artisan of \Vestern Aya named Kwan.in Chiri,:i who XIV. 21.
was near the Emperor, came for\vard and represented to him,
saying :-" There are in the Land of Han 4 many ,vho are
more skilful than thy slave. Let them be sent for and made
to serve thee." The Emperor commanded his Ministers,
saying :-" Then let K\van-in Chiri be joined to Otokimi and
the others, and let him get instructions from Pekche; at the
same time let an Imperial rescript be delivered directing Pekche
to offer skilled men."
   Hereupon Otokimi, in execution of these commands, took
with him a body of men and proceeded as far as pekche.
When he entered that land, a God of the country/) assuming
the form of an old woman, suddenly met him on the road.
Otokimi inquired of her whether the country was far or near.
The old woman answered and said :-" If thou goest on for
one day more, thou wilt then arrive there." Otokimi thought
to -himself that the wa~y was too far, and returned without
having chastised it.     He got together the Imaki 6 skilled
artisans who had been given as tribute by Pekche on a large
island, and under the pretence of awaiting a fair wind,
tarried there for several months. Tasa no Omi, the Governor
of Imna, pleased that Otokimi had gone away \vithout chas-

  1  The" Central Land" is evidently Japan. The Kana has" Mikado."
  2  Fishermen.
  :i Possibly these are the names of two men. The Western Aya \vere the
Aya of Kahachi.
  .& Corea.                        ,) This must reter to Silla.
  6 Imaki is the name of a place in Yoshino in Yalnato.         It means "ne\v-
comer,~' and the term may have been applied in the first place to this batch
of ell1igrants to distinguish theln from previous ones.
        J26
        35°                             NIIIONGI.

          tising Silla, secretly sent a man to Pekche, to \varn Otokimi,
          saying :_d Is thine own head so firm that thou canst chastise
          others? A report has reached me that the Emperor has
          wedded my \vife, with the result that he has had children by
          her. [The children are mentioned above. i ] As I no,,, fear
          that calamity may reach my own person, it is ,veIl that I should
XI\T. 22. ,vait with foot uplifted. Do thou, my son, come over and
          betake thyself to Pekche, and prevent it from conlmunicating
          with Japan, ,vhile I will repair to and hold Ilnna, and ,viII also
          hold no communication with Japan." Otokimi's wife Kusu-
          hime had profound patriotic sentiment; the sense of duty
          between lord and vassal was strong in her; her loyalty sur-
          passed the bright sun; her principles excelled the evergreen
          fir. She abominated such treason, and having stealthily
          killed her husband, secretly buried him in the chamber. Then
          she remained in the large island with Akawo, Ama no Atahe,
          in charge of the skilled artisans presented by pekche. The
          Emperor, hearing that Otokimi ,vas missing, sent Katashiha,
           Hitaka no Kishi, and Ko An-chon. 2 These messengers together
          made their report to the Emperor. They 3 were accordingly
          ultimately settled in the village of Hirokitsu in Ato in the
          province of Yarnato, where many of them died of disease. In
          consequence of this, the Emperor commanded ~furuya,
          Ohotomo no Ohomuraji, to instruct Tsukami, Yamato no Aya"
XIV. 23. no Atahe to remove Ko-kwi, of the Potters' Be, Kyon-k\vi, of
          the Saddlers' Be, In-sa..ra.. ka, of the Painters' 0 Be, Chong-an-
          na, of the Brocade-weavers' Be, and Myo-an-na, the Inter-
          preter, all belonging to the New Aya,6 to other residences
           at the following three places, viz., Upper Momohara, Lower
           Momohara, and Magami no Hara.

           1 As a matter of fact, they are not; the "Shukai" rejects this note. As
         the " Shukai" editor points out, all this cannot belong to the san1e year of
         Yiiriaku's reign.
           ~ Ko An-chon.     Probably a Corean. Chon means copper cash, which
         were unkno\vn in Japan at this time.
           3 This must refer to the Pekche artisans.

           .. Otherwise called the Eastern Aya.
           5 The first mention of the art of painting.

           6 TheAya or Han would now appear to have three branches-the Eastern or

         Yamato Aya, the \Vestern or Kahachi Aya, and the New or Itnaki Aya, ,vhose
         introduction is here related. They all consisted of skilled men fr0111 Corea.
                              YURI.AKU.                             35 1
        A certain book says :-" Otokimi, Kibi no Omi, returned
     from Pekche, and presented a Be of Aya workmen, a Be
     of tailors, and a Be of fleshers."
   8th year, Spring, 2nd month. Awo, Musa no Suguri, and A.D. 464-
Haka-toko, Hinokuma no Tami-tsukahi, were sent to the
Country of Wu.
   From the accession of the Emperor up to this year eight
years had now passed, during \vhich the Land of Silla was refrac-
tory and given to vain talk, and did not send presents. There-
fore they feared the intentions of the Central Land,l and
cemented friendship with Koryo. Consequently the King of
Koryn sent one hundred picked soldiers to guard Silla. After
a while, one of these Koryo soldiers returned to his own
country on furlough. Now he took with him a Silla man as XIV. 24.
groom. Turning to him, he addressed him, saying: -" Thy
country will be conquered by my country ere lang." [One
book says : -Thy country will in the end become our territory,
and that ere long.] When the groom heard this, he pretended
a pain in his belly, and retiring, remained behind. At length
he made his escape to his own country, and told what
had been said. Hereupon the King of Silla knew that Karyn's
guard was mere pretence, and sent messengers to run and tell
the people to kill the cocks kept in their houses. The people
knew his meaning, and killed all the men of Koryn 2 resident in
the country. Only one Koryo man was left, who seized an
opportunity to effect his escape and flee to his own country,
when he told the whole story. The king of Koryo accord-
ingly raised an army and encamped by the city of Chhyuk..
chong-nyu. [One book says the city of Tokushikz".] At length
they made music, with song and dance. Hereupon the King
of Silla, hearing in the night the Koryn army singing and
dancing on all sides, became aware that the enemy had occu-
pied the whole land of Silla. So he sent a man to the King of
Imna, saying :-" The King of Karyn has attacked our country.
At this present time, like the fringes sewn on a flag,3 the condi-
  1   Japan.
  s Kokuryo, the proper name of this country, resembles the onomatopoetic
,,?ord for the crowing of a cock: English, cock-a-doodle.. doo; French,
kokeriko ; Japanese, Bekkako.
   3 Which are always wobbling about.
        J26
        35 2                               NIIIONGI.

         tion of the land is more precarious than that of a pile of eggs.
XIV. 25. The thread of life is short, and may not at all be reckoned. I
         humbly beg that the Japanese Authorities 1 will assist me with
         ","ar generals."
            Accordingly the I{ing of lmna persuaded Ikaruga, Kashihade
         no Omi, W onashi, Kibi no Omi, and Akameko, Naniha no
         Kishi to go to the assistance of Silla. Kashihade no Omi and
         the others halted before they reached the camp, and before the
         Koryo generals had fought with Kashihade no Omi and the
         others, they were all afraid. So Kashihade no Omi and his
         colleagues did their best to keep the troops in good heart, and
         urged them to get ready the means of attack. Then suddenly
         they advanced and took the offensive. For more than ten
         days they and the Karyn nlen kept \vatch on one another.
         When night came on they pierced a steep place, and made a
         hollow way, along which they passed all the baggage wagons
         and prepared an ambush. At dawn the Karyn men thought
         to themselves :-" Kashihade no Omi and the others are steal-
         ing a\vay." So they came in pursuit with their whole army.
         Then the troops in ambush, both horse and foot, were let go,
         and taking them from both sides, put them to a great rout. It
         was from this that the enmity between the two countries sprang.
         [By the two countries are meant Silla and Karyn.]
            Kashihade no Omi and his colleagues spake to Silla, saying:
         - " Thou with the utmost weakness wert pitted against the
         utmost strength, and h~d it not been for the assistance of the
         Government 2 troops thou wouldst assuredly have been taken at
         a disadvantage and thy territory annexed. By this campaign
         be warned never in future to be disobedient to the Celestial
         Court." 3

           1 In the original B  * W·                                           't
                                           1"'he" Shukai " editor alters this to     J(f or
        official authorities, for no better reason than that the latter term is the one
        used in Kimtuei's reign. B ~ occurs frequently after this time, no doubt
        being employed retrospectively. Probably the actual \vord used by the King
        of Silla \vasWa.
           2 i.e. Japanese.
          "3 It is difficult to say ho\v luuch truth there is in this Corean episode. The
        "Tongkanl" lends no corroboration. On the contrary the only notices of
        Japan \vhich it contains about this time relate to Japanese descents on the
        Silla Coast. One is recorded in 459, one in 463, and one in 476. No un·
        usual enmity bet\veen Silla and Koryo at this tilne is mentioned in the
                                 YURIA.I(U.                               353
  9th year, Spring, 2nd month, 1st day·. Katabu; Ofushi A.I>. 465.
                                                                  XIV. 26.
Kahachi no Atahe, and an U neme were sent to sacrifice to the
Deity of Munagata.~ Katabu and the Uneme, having arrived
at the altar-place,3 \vere about to perform the rites, when
Katabu debauched the U neme. When the Emperor heard
this, he said :-" When we sacrifice to the Gods and invoke
from them blessings, should we not be watchful over our con-
duct?" So he sent Naniha no Hidaka no Kishi to put him to
death. But Katabu straightway took to flight, and was not to
be found. The Emperor again sent Toyoho, Yuge 4 no Muraji,
who searched the districts of that province far and wide, and at
length caught and slew him at Awi;) no hara, in the district of
Mishima.
   3rd month. The Emperor desired to chastise Silla in person,
but a God warned him, saying :-" Go not." For this reason
the Emperor did not carry out his intention of going, but gave
orders to Ki no W oyumi no Sukune, Saga no Karako no Sukune,
Ohotomo no Katari 6 no Muraji, and Wokahi no Sukune, saying:
- " Silla occupies the \\T estern Land: age after age he has done
us homage: he did not neglect visits of ceremony: his payment
of tribute was duly discharged. But since We have come to rule XIV'. 27.
the Empire, he has betaken himself beyond Tsushima, and con-
cealed his traces outside of Chamna. He prevents Koryn from
sending tribute, he devours the walled cities of Pekche. Nay,
more-his missions of ceremony to this court have been
neglected and his tribute remains unpaid. With the savage

"Tongkam." Nor does this narrative square "ery \vell with what is related
below, xiv. 26, 27. I anl inclined, nevertheless, to believe that it has a solid
foundation of fact, oRly that the dates must be wrong.
  fi.. rom " having pierced" to " great rout "is copied mutatis mutandis from
a Chinese history of the Wei period, reign of Jv\"T u Ti, and Kashihade no
Omi's speech to the King of Silla is extracted from the same source.
  1 This curious name 111eanS " fragrance-giver."

  2 In Yamato.
  a The Kana rendering is Kanlu-niha (divine courtyard), ,vhich is not
exactly an altar, but a plot of ground set apart for the worship of the Gods.
See above, p. 8 I, note 9.
  " Bow-n1akers.
       Awi is indigo, the Polygonutn tinctorium.
  6 The Katari \vere reciters attached to the Court. Unfortunately we know

very little about them, or what the subjects of their recitations were.
         J26
        354                               NIHONGI.

         heart of the wolf he flies a\vay when satiated, and sticks fast
         when starving. I appoint you four ministers to be generals.
         Take a royal army and chastise him. Let the punishment of
         Heaven be reverently executed."
            Hereupon Ki no W oyumi no Sukune laid a complaint before
         the Emperor through Ohotomo no Muruya no Ohomuraji, say-
         ing :-" Thy servant, although feeble and incompetent, will
         respectfully obey the Emperor's orders. But now thy servant's
         wife has departed this life, and there is no"body to take care of
         thy servant. Do Thou, m}· Lord, I beseech Thee, represent
         this matter fully to the Emperor." Hereupon Ohotomo no
          Muruya no Ohomuraji represented it fully. When the
          Emperor heard this complaint, he uttered a sigh of pity. He
         took an Uneme from the hither province of Kibi, Ohomi 1 by
          name, and giving her to Ki no Woyumi no Sukune, attached her
          to his person to take care of him. So at length he sent him off
         with a shove to his axle.
             Ki no W oyumi no Sukune and the rest accordingly entered
          Silla, butchering as they went the districts along their way.
XIV. 28. The King of Silla heard by night on all sides the drums of the
          Government army, and becoming aware that they had com-
          pletely conquered the land of Tok,2 fled in confusion with several
          hundred cavalry. Ther~by ensued a great defeat. Woyumi
          no Sukune pursued and slew the enemy's general in the midst
          of his army. The whole land of Tok was reduced to order, but
          there was a remainder which would not submit. Ki no W oyumi
           no Sukune again withdrew his troops, and having effected a
          junction with Ohotomo no Katari no Muraji and the others, they
          again, with a great display of forces, fought with the remaining
          band. This evening Ohotomo no Katari no Muraji and Ki no
          Okazaki no Kume no Muraji were both slain while fighting with
          all their might. Tsumaro, a follower of Katari no ~Iuraji, of
          the same surname,s afterwards came amongst the army and
           asked for his master. He went along the ranks and sought for
           him, making inquiry, and saying: - " Where is my master,
           Lord Ohotomo?" Then some one informed him, saying : -

           1 Great sea.
           2   See above, p. 249, where it \vould seeln that Tok ,vas a part of Kara.
           3   Or title.
                             YURIAKU.                       355
 " Thy masters 1 have, indeed, been slain by the enemy," and
 pointed out to him the place where the dead bodies were.
 Tsumaro hearing this, leaped alld exclaimed, saying :-" My
 master has fallen. \Vhat avails it that I alone should remain
 unhurt ?'~ Accordingly he too went against the enemy, and in
 the same hour perished. Soon after, the rest of the band retired
 of their own accord, and the Government army also followed
 their example, and fell back. The general-in-chief, !{i no
 W oyumi no Sukune, fell ill and died.
    Summer, 5th month. Ki no Ohiha no Sukune, when he heard
 that his father was dead, forthwith proceeded to Silla, and
 taking- from W okahi no Sukune his command of horse, foot
 and ships, with the various lesser offices, exercised absolute XIV. 29-
 authority. Hereupon Wokahi no Sukune had a profound
 resentment towards Ohiha no Sukune and made a false report
 to Karako no Sukune, saying :-" Ohiha no Sukune has told
thy servant, saying :-' Ere long I will take the command of
 !{arako no Sukune from him too.' I pray thee be well on thy
guard." In consequence of this there was a coolness between
 Karako no Sukune and Ohiha no Sukune. Upon this the
 King of Pekche, hearing that there was a coolness between the
 commanders arising out of trifling causes, sent a man to Karako
 no Sukune and the others, saying :-" I wish to view the
 frontier of the land. I pray you be so kind as to come and
join me." Herewith Karako no Sukune and the rest went on
 with bridle-bits in a line until they came to a river, when
 Ohiha no Sukune let his horse drink from the river. Then
 Karako no Sukune shot at Ohiha no Sukune from behind, and
hit the hinder part of his saddle frame. Ohiha no Sukune
looked round startled, and shot Karako no Sukune down into
the mid stream, so that he died. So the three Omi, having
from before this time been rivals with one another, fell out b~y
the way, and returned back without having reached the Palace
of the King of Silla.
   Hereupon the Uneme, Ohomi, following the dead body of
Woyumi no Sukune, arrived in Japan. She at length com-
plained to Ohotomo no Muruya no Ohomuraji, saying:-
"Thy handmaiden knows not where to bury him. I beseech
thee let a good place be selected by divination." The Oho-
                        I   ,s"ic in originat
           J26                             NIHONGI.

           muraji accordingly reported to the Emperor, ,,,ho gaye con1-
           mand to the Ohomuraji, saying :-" The Commander-in-chief,
           I~i no W oyumi no Sukune, tossing his head like a dragon,
           and glaring like a tiger, surveying ,vith extensive vie,v the eight
           cords/ overwhelmed the rebellious, and dashed against the
XI\". 30   four seas. 2 So his body ,vas worn out b:y ten thousand ri,:~ and
           his life succumbed in the three Han. To sho,v OUf compassion,
           let there be appointed officials to conduct his funeral. Thou, m~y
           Lord Ohotomo, art of the same province and a near neighbour
           of the Lords of Ki, sothat thy connection \vith him is of old stand-
           ing." Hereupon the Ohomuraji, having received the Emperor's
           cOlnmands, sent Wotori Hanishi" no Muraji to construct a tumn-
           Ius at the village of Tamuwa, and bury him there. Upon this
           0110mi, unable to contain herself for pleasure, sent to the Oho-
           muraji six Corean slaves named Muro, Te-maro, Oto-maro,
           Mi-kura, \Vogura and Hari. 5 They are the Yake-bito G Be of
           the village of Kashimada in hither Kibi. \V okahi no Sukune
           came specially in attendance on Ki no W oyumi D.O Sukune's
           corpse. He remained, however, himself in the Land of Tsuno-;
           and sent Yamato-ko no Muraji [it is not clear what was the
           surname of this Muraji 8J with a present of an eight-hand mirror
           to Ohotomo no Ohomuraji to make a petition, saying:-
           "Th)7 servant cannot bear to serve the Celestial Court along
           \\rith my Lord of Ki. 9 Therefore I beg permission to remain
           and reside in the Land of Tsuno." Upon this the Ohomuraji
           laid the matter before the Emperor on his behalf, and he ,,"as
               1 The eight cords, or tneasuring tapes, i.e. the eight quarters of the

           universe.
               Z The four seas are not put for Japan, but for the universe.      All this
           botnbast is copied {ronl a Chinese book.
              a i.e. by distant campaigning.
              4 The Hanishi were the clay-\vorkers whose office it \vas to tnake the clay

           images \\,hich ,vere set up round the tombs of the Emperors. His appoint-
           111ent was therefore an appropriate one. But although the office and the
           title sometimes coincided, as in this case, they had often nothing to do ,vith
           each other. A few pages back we had a !(atari no l\luraji (Chief of the
           Reciters) and a Kashihade no Omi (Lord Steward) in command of troops in
           Corea.
              ;) These nalnes are Japanese.         8 DOlnestics.            In Suwo.
               a This is a stupid note which the "Shukai" ,~ery properly rejects. In
           "Nihongi" language Yamatc-ko no Muraji is the surname.
               9 i.e.~Ki no Ohiha no Sukune.
                             YURIAI(U.                             357
allo\ved to remain and dwell in the Land of Tsuna. This ,vas
the beginning of the Tsuno no Omi first dwelling in the land of
Tsuno, and being called TsuDa no Omi.
   Autumn, 7th month, 1St day. The province of Kahachi re- XI\". 31.
ported :-" The daughter of a man of the district of Asukabe
named Hiakiison, Tanabe no Fubito, was wife to a man named
 !{ariu, Fumi no Obito, of the district of Furuchi. Hiakiison.




                               Clay JIorse.



hearing that his daughter had given birth to a child, paid a
visit of congratulation to his son-in-law's house. He came
home by moonlight, and was passing at the foot of the Homuda 2
misasagi at Ichihiko hill, \vhen he fell in with a horseman
mounted on a red courser, which dashed along lik~ the flight of

  1 Both Hiakuson and Kariu are Chinese words.  This story is apparently
a report by one of the recorders \vhose appointment is nlentioned above,
P·3 0 7·
  2 Ojin Tenn5.
        358
        J26                               N ih o n g i.

          a dragon, ,vith splendid high springing action, darting off like a
          \vild goose. 1 His strange form \vas of lofty mould; his remark-
          able aspect was of extreme distinction. Hiakiison approached
          and looked at him. In his heart he wished to possess him, so
          he whipped up the piebald horse \vhich he rode and brought
          him alongside of the other, head by head and bit by bit. But
XIV. 32. the red horse shot ahead, spurning the earth, and, galloping on,
          speedily vanished in the distance. Hereupon the piebald horse
          lagged behind, and, slow of foot, could not overtake the other.
          But the rider of the courser, knowing Hiakuson's wish, stopped
          and exchanged horses with him, upon \vhich they took leave of
          each other and separated. Hiakiison, greatly rejoiced at obtain-
          ing such a steed, hastened home and placed him in the stable,
          where he took off his saddle, foddered him, and went to sleep.
          The next morning the red courser had become changed into a
          horse of clay. Hiakuson, wondering at this in his heart, went
          back, and, making search at the Romuda misasagi, found the
          piebald horse standing among the clay horses. So he took it,
          and left in its stead the clay horse which he had received in
          exchange. 2
A.D. 466.    loth year, Autumn, 9th month, 4th day. Awo, Musa no
          Sukuri, and t.he others arrived in Tsukushi with two geese pre-
          sented by \Vu. These geese were bitten by Minuma no Kimi's
          dog and died.
                  Another book says :--" These geese \vere bitten by a dog
XIV. 33.        belonging to Nimaro, Tsukushi no Mine no Agata nushi,
                and died."
             Hereupon Minuma no Kimi, unable to contain himself for
          fear and sorro\v, presented to the Emperor ten large wild geese
          \vith bird-keepers, and begged that his offence might thus be
          compounded for. The Emperor granted his petition.
             Winter, loth month, 7th day. The bird-keepers presented
          by Minuma no Kimi were settled in two places, viz. the villages
          of Karu and Ihare.

          1   As usual, this purpureus pannus is copied {roln a Chinese author.
          ~ The clay horses here referred to ,vere of the kind described at p. 181 as
        having been substituted for the living" horses previously sacrificed at the
        tomb. Some of these have been preserved, and specil11ens nlay be seen in
        the Museum at Uyeno, 1·okio. The illustration represents one of these.
                                YURIAI~U.                                359
   11th year, Summer, 5th month, 1St day'. It \vas reported A.D. 46 7.
from the district of Kurimoto in the province of Ohomi that
white cormorants d,velt on the shore at Tanagami. Orders
were therefore given to establish toneri 1 of Kahase.
   Autumn, 7th month. There was a refugee from Pekche
who gave his name as Kwisin. It ,vas also stated that K\visin
was a man of the Land of '"".T u. The Ihare no Kure 2 no Koto-
biki and the Sakate no Yakata-maro are his descendants.
   Winter, loth month. A bird of the Bird-department was
bitten by a dog belonging to a man of U da and died.. The
Emperor was angry, and, branding him on the face, made him
one of the Bird-keepers' Be. Hereupon some office coolies from
the provinces of Shinano and Musashi, \vho were on night duty
at the Palace, talked to one another, saying :-" Ah! In our
country \ve pile up birds as high as a small tumulus and eat of
them morning and evening, but still some are left. No\\r, for XI\T. 34·
the sake of one bird, the Emperor has branded a man on the
face. He is a very unjust and wicked master." The Emperor,
hearing this, ordered thern to gather and make a heap (of birds),
and as the office coolies \vere unable to complete it on the spot,
he commanded that they should be enlisted in the Bird-keepers'
Be.:I
   12th year, Summer, 4th month, 4 th da~y. Awo, ~fusa no A.D. 468.
Sukuri, and Haka-toko Hinokuma no Tamitsukahi went on a
mission to W u.
   Autumn, loth month, loth day. The Emperor commanded
the carpenter Mita of Tsuke [" Mita of Winabe," 4 says one
book-probably erroneously J to commence the erection of a
lofty edifice. Hereupon ~Iita ascended this high building, and
ran about nim bly on all sides as if he were flying. Arl U neme
of Ise looked up to the top of this high edifice and marvelled
at his nimble movements, so that she fell down on her face in
the courtyard, and upset a dish of meat which she was serving

    1 No doubt to take charge of the COrlTIOrants.        Kahase, which means
river-reach, mayor Inay not be a proper nanle.
    2 Kure is the san1e as \\ITU, a part of China.  Kotobiki means lute-player.
 I t came to be a proper nan1e.
    3 From \vhich it \vould SeelTI that the office coolies \vere of higher rank
than the Bird-keepers.
    .. Winabe is the name of a place in Settsu. Tsuke is in Yamato.
                                                                  B b
            J26                            NIHONGI.

            to the Emperor. The Emperor forthwith suspected that Mita
            had debauched this U neme, and conceiving to himself the
            thought of executing him, charged the Mononobe with this
            duty. At this time Hada no Sake! no Kimi was in attendance.
            He wished by the voice of his lute to make the Emperor under-
            stand, so placing his lute crosswise, and playing upon it, he
            said : -
XI\T. 35.                             Be there for five hundred years
                                      Prosperity
                                      To the maid of Ise
                                      Of Ise
                                      (Of the divine wind),
                                      And until it is spent
                                      Let me attend
                                      With faithful service
                                      On the Great Lord.
                                      Let my life, too,
                                      Be as long,
                                      Said the carpenter,
                                      The poor carpenter! 2

            Hereupon the Emperor understood the voice of the lute, and                  I


          pardoned the offence.
A.D. 469.   13th year, Spring, 3rd month. H,adane no Mikoto, great-
          great-grandson of Saho-hiko,s secretly seduced the Uneme
          Yamanobe no Koshimako. When this came to the Emperor's
          ears, he gave Hadane no Mikoto in charge to MOllonobe no Me
          no Ohomuraji, and made him call him to account for it.
          Hadane no Mikoto purged his offence by the payment of eight
          horses and eight s\\fords, and then made a song, saying : -

                                    For the sake of Koshinlako,
                                    Of Yamanobe,


                1 Sake is 11 rice-beer.    This person \vas, perhaps, a descendant of the
             Corean Prince Chhyu mentioned above, A.D. 353, and whose name is written
            with the same character. The word Hada, however, points to a Chinese
            ancestry. Hada is the Japanese traditional rendering of tile character for
            T'sin, the Chinese dynasty of that nalue.
                2 Some COlumentators explain part of this poem differently. The luetre is
            i r.regular.
                3 It is not clear why so remote a descendant of a Mikado should be called

            Mikoto.
                               YURI..\ KU.                               J26

                       SOine one boasts that
                       The eight horses
                       Are not even to be grudged.

   Me no Ohomuraji, hearing this, reported it to the Emperor,
who made Hadane no Mikoto layout his treasures on the
ground at Tachibana mota 1 of Ichinobe in Yega. He ultimately
took the village of Nagano in Yega, and gave it to Mononobe
no Me no Ohomuraji.
   Autumn, 8th month. There was a man of 1vIiwikuma in the XIV. 36•
province of Harima called Ayashi no \Vomaro, who was strong
of body and stout of heart, and did \vanton outrage, committing
robberies on the highwa~ys, and preventing traffic. He in-
tercepted the boats of merchants and plundered them every
one. He had also disobeyed the la\vs of the country by
neglecting to pay his taxes.
    Hereupon the Emperor sent Ohoki, Kasuga no Wono no
ami, in command of one hundred soldiers who feared not
 death. They all together took torches, and having surrounded
 his house, set fire to it. N ow from the midst of the flames
 there came forth furiously a white dog, \vhich pursued Ohoki
 no ami. This dog was as big as a horse. But the complexion of
 Ohoki no Omi's spirit did not change.~ He drew his sword and
 slew it, whereupon it became changed into Ayashi no Womaro.
    Autumn, 9th month. The carpenter, Mane, of the Wina
 Be, planed timber with an axe,=~ using a stone as ruler. All
 day long he planed, and never spoiled the edge by mistake. XIV. 37·
 The Emperor visited the place, and, ,vondering, asked of him,
 saying :-" Dost thou never make a mistake and strike the
 stone?" Mane answered and said :-" I never make a mis-
 take!" Then the Emperor called together the U neme, and
  made them strip off their clothing and wrestle in open view
 with only their waistcloths on. Hereupon Mane ceased for a
 while, and looked up at them, and then \vent on with his planing.
  But unawares he made a slip of the hand, and spoilt the edge

   1 Tachibana moto means" orange-stein, or orange-bottom," and possibly

is to be taken here in this sense, and not as the name of a place.
   ~ Here is the nlagician (world-\vide) ,vho can change himself into a beast,
hut on being wounded or killed is obliged to assume his natural forn1.
  J The plane ,vas apparently unknown.
           J26                            NIIIONGI.

           of his tool. The Emperor accordingly rebuked him, saying :-
           " Where does this fellow come from that, without respect to us,
           he gives such heedless answers with llnchastened heart?" So
           he handed him over to the NIononobe to be executed on the
           moor.
              Now amongst his comrades .there was a carpenter who-
           lamented for Mane, and made a song, saying:-

                                   The much to be regretted
                                   Carpenter of Winabe-
                                   The ink-cord ·he applied,-
                                   When he is no more,
                                   Who will apply it ?
                                   Alas ! that ink-cord ! 1

           When the Emperor heard this song, his feelings changed to
           remorse, and he said with a sigh of regret :-" How many men
           I have destroyed!" So he mounted a messenger of mercy on
           a black horse of Kahi, and made him gallop to the place of
           execution to stop it and pardon him. The cords with which
           he was tied were unbound, and he, too, made a song,.
           sayIng : -
                                   As the night 2
                                   Black was the horse of Kahi-
                                   Had they but saddled him,
XIV. 38.                           My life were lost-
                                   Ah ! that horse of Kahi !

                 Instead of "My life were lost," one book has, "He
              ,vould not have arrived (in time)."
A.D. 470.   14th year, Spring, 1st month, 13th day. Awo, Musa no-
          Sukuri, and the others, in company with envoys from the Land

              1 The ink-cord is a contrivance for ruling lines on wood, used to .this day

           by Japanese carpenters. A cord is passed through a pot of ink and then
           drawn taut, and let go so as to strike the wood. A chalked line is some-
           times used in the same ,yay in this country& See illustration in "Trans-
           actions of Japan Society," Vol. II. p. 217. The metre of this poem is
           irregular, being a tanka with an additional line of seven syllables bet",ween
           the second and third.
              2 This is one of many explanations of the conventional epithet nubatama"

           applied to dark or black things.
                               YURIAKU.                               J26

of \V u, and bringing with them skilled \vorkmen presented by
\Vu, viz. Aya weavers and Kure 1 weavers, as ,veIl as the
seamstresses Ane-hime and Oto-hime, anchored in the harbour
of Suminoye. In this month the Shihatsu highway Vias carried
through as a road for the guests from \Vu. It was called the
Kure-saka. 2
   3rd month. The Elnperor commanded the Omi and Muraji
to go to receive the envoys from Wu. The men of Wu were
accordingly settled on the moor of Hinokuma, which was
therefore called Kure-hara. 3 The seamstress Ane-hime ,vas
presented to the God of Oho-Mi\va, and Oto-hime ,vas
appointed to the Be of Aya seamstresses. The Aya weavers,
the Kure weavers and the seamstresses-these were the founders
of the Asuka Seamstresses' Be and of the Ise Seamstresses' Be.
   Summer, 4th month, 1st day. The Emperor, wishing to
Illake a feast for the men of \Vu, asked the ministers, one after
another, saying :-" Who will be the best man to keep them
company at table?" The ministers all said :-" Ne no Omi will
be the proper person." The Emperor accordingl)' gave command
to Ne no Olni, and appointed him to keep them company in
eating. Ultimately the moen of Wu were entertained at Taka-
nukuhara in Iso no Kami." Now a Toneri was sent secretly XIV. 39.
to observe the ornamentation. The Toneri reported to the
Emperor, saying :-" The je\vel head-dress worn by Ne no Omi
is very noble, and extremely lovely." Moreover, everybody
said, " He also wore it before when he "",~ent to receive the men
of 'Vu." Hereupon the Emperor, wishing to see it himself,
gave orders to the Omi and ~furaji, and nlade them present
themselves before the hall in the dress which they ,yore at the
banquet. The Empress looked up to Heaven and, ,vith sobs
and tears, lamented bitterly. The Emperor inquired of her,
saying :-" \Vhy weepest thou?" The Empress, leaving the

   1 For Aya and Kure the Chinese characters are      iI   and:!Jt,i.e. Han
and Wu, the Chinese dynasties so called. But in this connection the
Japanese render these names by Aya and Kure.
   The" Shukai" editor has a note here to the effect that Han is Chang-an
and Loh.yang, formerly capitals of Han; Wu is Chien-kang (Chien-yeh ?),
the Wu capital, near the present Nanking.
   2 Wu acclivity.              :i The plain of Wu.  It is in Yamato.
  .. Yanlato.
        J26                            NIIIONGI.

          couch, answered him, saying :-" This jewel head-dress was
          presented on behalf of thy handmaiden by her elder brother,
          Prince Oho-kusaka, when, in obedience to the orders of the
          Emperor Anaho, he offered her to Your Majesty.l Therefore I
          conceived suspicion of N e no Omi, and unawares shed tears
          and wept for grief." When the Emperor heard this he
          was astonished, and was very wroth. He pressed it sharply
          home to Ne no Omi, who replied, saying :-" I have deserved
          to die! I have deserved to die! Truly it is thy servant's
          fault." The Emperor commanded, saying :-" From this time
          forward let N e no Omi, his children, his descendants, and his
          eighty connections have ~o concern with the order of Ministers
          of State." He was about to put Ne no Omi to death, but he
          ran away and hid himself. Arriving at Hine, he made a rice-
          castle, in which he stood on the defensive, but was ultimately
          slain by the Government forces. The Emperor ordered the
          officials to divide his descendants into two parts, one of which
          was constituted common people of the Oho-kusaka Be, and
XIV. 40. was allotted in fief to the Empress; the other part was given
          to the Chinu no Agata-nushi, and made sack-bearers. So
          having sought out a descendant of Hikaka, N aniha no Kishi,2 a
          title was granted to him, and he was made Oho-kusaka Be no
          Kishi.
             After matters had become quiet, Wone:i no Omi [Wane no
          Omi was the son of N e no OmiJ, when lying down at night,
          said to some one :-" The Emperor's castle is not strong; my
          father's castle is strong." These words came to the Emperor's
          ears. He sent a man to see Ne no Omi's house. It was really
          as had been said. Therefore he seized him and put him to
          death. Ne no Omi's descendants were made Sakamoto no
           Omi. From this they had their beginning.
A.D. 471.     15th year. The Hada House 4 was dispersed. The Omi
           and Muraji each enforced their services at pleasure, and would
           not allow the Hada no Miyakko to control them. Con-
           sequently Sake, Hada no Miyakko, made a great grievance of

           1 See above, p. 330.     2 S.ee above, p. 33 1•    3 Wo means little.
          .. Hada. Several families of this name are mentioned in the " Seishiroku."
         They were believed to be descended from She H wang-Ti, the celebrated
         Chinese Emperor of the T'sin dynasty, who reigned B.C. 221 to 209.
                              YURL\K.U.                                J26

this, and took office with the Emperor. The Emperor loved
and favoured him, and commanded that the Hada House
should be assembled and given to Lord Sake of Hada. So
this Lord, attended by excellent Be workmen of 180 1 kinds, XIV. 41.
presented as industrial taxes fine silks, which were piled up so
as to fill the Court. Therefore he was granted a title, viz.
 Udzu-masa. [Some say Udzumori masa, the appearance of
all being piled up so as to fil1. 2]
   16th year, Autumn, 7th month. The Emperor ordered those A.D. 47 2 •
provinces and districts which were suitable for mulberr)T trees
to plant mulberry trees. He again dispersed to other places
the Hada House, and made them bring tribute of industrial
taxes.
   Win.ter, loth month. The Emperor ordered the Aya Be to
 be brought together, and established their Torno no Miyakko,
 granting him the title of Atahe.
        One book says :-" Granted the Aya no Omi the title of
      Atahe."
   17th year, Spring, 3rd month, 2nd day. The Hanishi 3 no A.D. 473.
 Muraji were made to present pure vessels suitable for serving
 the Emperor's morning and evening meals. Hereupon Ake,
 the ancestor 4 of the Hanishi no Muraji, presented to the
 Emperor a Be of his private subjects of the village of Kusasa in
 the province of Settsu, of the villages of Uchi and Fushimi in
 the province of Yamashiro, of the village of Fuji-kata in the XIV'. 42.
 province of Ise, and also from Tamha, Tajima and Inaba, and
 named them the Nihe & no Hanishi Be.
   r8th year, Autumn, 8th month, loth day. The Mononobe A.D. 474.
 Ushiro no Sukune and the Mononobe Me no Muraji were sent
 to smite Ise no Asahi no Iratsuko. Asahi no Iratsuko, hearing
 of the approach of the Government troops, opposed them in
 battle at Awoha:ka 6 in Iga. Priding himself on his skill in
 archery, he addressed the Government army, saying :_U Who

  1 180 is, of course, a fancy nutnber.

  :: This is an attempt to connect this nan1e \vith Isumoru, to be piled up.
  SPotters.
  4 Ancestor here cannot mean founder of the House.

  D Nihe means food; these potters "-ere for the supply of the Emperor's

table utensils.
  6   Green tumulus.
        J26                             NIIIONGI.

          is a match for the hand of Asahi no Iratsuko? The arrow
          which he lets fly will pierce two thicknesses of armour." The
          Government troops were all afraid, and Ushiro no Sukune did
          not dare to advance to the combat. They awaited each other
          for two days and one night. Hereupon the Mononobe ~le no
          Muraji armed himself with his sword, and making Oho-wono-
          te/ of the Mononobe of Kiku in Tsukushi, take his shield and
          callout in the midst of the army, advanced along with him.
          Asahi no Iratsuko saw them from afar off, and shot an arrow
          through Oho-wono-te's shield and two-fold armour which at
          the same time entered the flesh of his body to the depth of
XIV. 43. an inch. Oho-wono-te screened with his shield the Mononobe,
          Me no Muraji, and Me no Muraji caught Asahi no Iratsuko
          and slew him. Accordingly Ushiro no Sukune, heside himself
          with shame, for seven days did not make his report to the
          Emperor. But the Emperor inquired of his Ministers in
          attendance, saying :-" Why does not Ushiro no Sukune make
          his report?" Now there was a man named Sanuki no Ta-
          mushi \\Take who came forward and addressed the Emperor,
          saying :-" Ushiro no Sukune is a coward. For the space of
          two days and one night he was unable to seize Asahi no
          Iratsuko. Then the Mononobe, Me no Muraji, taking with
          him Oho-wono-te, a Mononobe of Kiku in Tsukushi, caught
          and slew Asahi no Iratsuko." When the Emperor ,heard
          this he was angry, and promptly taking away from Ushiro
          no Sukune his Be of Wina,~ gave it to the Mononobe Me no
          Muraji.
A.D. 475·   19th year, Spring, 3rd month, 13th day.. By Imperial
          command, the Anaho Be was established. 3
A.D. 476.   20th year,4 Winter. The" King of Koryo raised a great
          army and utterly smote pekche. There was but a small
          remnant left, which assembled and occupied Chhang-ha. o
          Their victuals became exhausted, and deep was hereupon the

          1   Great-axe-hand.
         ~ The village of Wina-Be, in Ise, with its inhabitants.
         3   In Inelnory of the Emperor Anaho.
          .. The" Tongkaln" date is 475. We have no\v arrived at pretty exact
       chronology.
          5   i' r.   The traditional Kana renders this Hesu-oto-perhaps an
       attempt to reproduce the native Corean name.
                               YURIAI(U.                                J26

weeping and lamentation. Upon this the Karyn generals
addressed their King, saying :-" There is something extra-
ordinary in the temper of pekche. Whenever thy servants
observe them, they seem unaware of their own ruin. It
is to be feared that they will again spread forth and revive.
We pray that they may be at length got rid of." The King
said :-" No! I, the unworthy one, have heard that the Land XIV. 44.
of Pekche is under the jurisdiction of the Country of Japan,
and that this connection is of old standing. It is also known
to all the neighbouring countries that their King repairs to
Japan and serves the Emperor." Ultimately it (the proposal
 to extermiIlate the Pekche people) ,vas abandoned.
         The Pekche record says :-" King Kero, year Kinoto U
      (475), Winter. A large arm~y from Koryo came and
      besieged the great castle for seven days and seven nights.
      The Royal castle surrendered, and at length they destroyed
      Wi-nye. The King, Queen, and Princes all fell into the
      hands of the enemy."
   21st year, Spring, 3rd month. The Emperor, hearing that XLV. 45-
 Pekche had been conquered b)r Koryo, gave Kuma--nari to A.D. 477·
 King Munchu, and so lent aid to his country. The men of
 that day all said :-" The Land of Pekche, though their race
 was destroyed, assembled and lamented at Chhang-ha. They
 with true hearts appealed to the Emperor, who restored their
 country."
         King Munchu was King Kero's ~younger brother by the
      mother's side. An ancient Japanese record says :-" The
      statement that Kumanari ,vas given to King Mata 1 is
       probably' an error. Kumanari is a separate village of the
       district of Lower Takori 2 in Imna."

   1 *    ~. The Coreans call him    *-  7', i.e. ::\lu-te. He was l\tlunchu)s
 successor. The Traditional Kana has Arushi for   r,    lower. The Corean for
 Lo\ver is are.
     The syllable ko in this name is probably an error, as belo\v (reign of
 Keidai), Upper Tari and Lo\ver Tari are luentioned as districts. National
 vanity is a powerful stimulus to the tuythopreic faculty, and the above
 narrative must be taken with a few grains of salt. But it is no doubt true
 in the main. The" Tongkam," \\Thich gives a short account of the \VaT,
 says that Silla sent an arlny of 10,000 lnen to the assistance of pekche.
 U ncler the year 475 it records the renl0yal of the Pekche capital to U ng-
            J26                              NIHONGI.

A.D. 478.    22nd year, Spring, 1St month. Prince Shiraga was made
          I-Ieir Apparent.
             Autumn, 7th month. A man of Tsutsukaha in the district
          of Yosa in the province of Tamba, the child of Urashima of
          Midzunoye, went fishing in a boat. At length he caught a
          large tortoise, 1 which straightway became changed into a
          woman. Hereupon Urashima's child fell in love with her, and
          made her his wife. They \vent down together into the sea and
          reached Horai San,2 \vhere they saw the genii. The story is
          in another Book.:~
A.D. 479.    23rd }·ear, Summer, 4th month. King Munkeun 4 of Pekche
XIV. 47.
          died.
            chin. No\v Dng-chin or Ung-chhon         <. f-4t     or • llf)  \vas a town in
            Kyong-syang--do, near the present Keumhe, and the meaning is Bear-port
            or Bear-river, evidently, therefore, the same with the Kuma-nari of the
            text. Kuma is for kOllla, the Corean word for bear, and nati is a dialectical
            or ancient form of nKi (pronounced ne), river. It occurs above in the name
            of the river which the King of Silla swears by at p. 231. Ung-chin or
            Kuma-nari ,vas in the Itulla territory, the capital of ,vhich \vas Keumhe.
            then controlled by Japan, and it is not at all improbable that it should be
            ceded to Pekche on this occasion.
              The" Tongkanl " lnentions a Japanese descent on the eastern coast of
            Sina in 476. They \vere driven off with a loss of 200 men.
               I Or turtle.

              2 " Mount Horai is the P'eng-Lai-Shan of the Chinese, one of the Three
            Isles of the Genii, which \vere believed to lie in the Eastern Sea, opposite to
            the coast of China. This happy group was the paradise of the Genii, who
            there maintained a selnpiternal vig"our by quaffing the \vaters of the fountain
            of life which flowed for them in a perpetual stream. The pine, the plum,
            the peach-tree, and the sacred fungus grow for ever upon its rocky shores;
            and the ancient crane builds its nest upon the giant limbs of its never-
            dying pine." Catalogue of Japanese paintings in the British Museum,
            Anderson, p. 224. See also Dickins' "Taketori.. ~fonogatari," in the" R.A.S.
            Transactions." The" Manyoshiu," an ancient collection of Japanese poems,
            contains a beautiful version of this legend, \vhich has been rendered into
            English verse by !\tIr. B. H. Chamberlain, in his" Classical Poetry of the
            Japanese," and of which a prose version may be found in my grammar of
            the Japanese \vritten language. The Chinese and Japanese legendary lore
            associated with Horai San is of boundless extent.
              The Interlinear Kana renders Horai San by Tokoyo no Kuni, or Eternal
            Land, which is quite inadequate.

              " There is no Pekch6 king of this name. King Saln-Keun         (=
              3 The" Sbukai " editor rejects this as an unauthorized addition.


            died in this year (the month differs), is doubtless meant. The first
                                                                                  }T), who
                               YURIAKU.                                 J26

   The Emperor summoned \vithin the Palace Prince ~,Iata
(~lute), the second of Prince Konchi's five sons, \vho was :young
in years, but intelligent. He himself stroked the Prince's face
and head, and made a gracious decree, appointing him to reign
over that country. He also gave him \veapons, and at the
same time furnished him '\vith 500 soldiers of the Land of
Tsukushi to escort him to his country. He became King
Tong..syong. 1
   This year, tribute was sent from Pekche in excess of the
regular amount.
   Tsukushi no Achi no Otni and U makahi no Omi, in com-
mand of a naval force, attacked Koryo.
   .L\utumn, 7th month. The Emperor took to his sick-bed,
and ,vas ill at ease. By an Imperial decree he committed
re\vards and punishments, together with financial matters, great
and small alike, to the charge of the Prince Imperial.
   8th month, 7th da)T. The Enlperor's disease became lnore
and lTIOre grave. He took leave of all the functionaries. He
pressed all their hands '\vith sobs and lamentations, and died
in the Great Hall, having left command to Ohotomo no XIV. 48
1:Iuruya no Ohomuraji and Yamato-Aya no Tsuka no Atahe,
saying :-" At the present time, the world is one household:
smoke and fire are 10,000 ri distant: 2 the people are \vell-
ordered: the four barbarians are submissive. This is by the
,viII of Heaven, which desires to besto\v peace throughout

character ~ canle in SOllleho,v fronl the nanle of the preceding King
(~ ;ii) l\'1unchu. The follo,ving is fronl the " Tongkaln," 1\'. 32, under
the date A.D. 477. "Sulnmer, 4th month. The King of Pekch6 appointed
his eldest son San1keun to be Heir Apparent. Heku of Pekche killed his
Prince Munchu. The Heir Apparent Sanlkeun caine to the throne. His
age ,vas thirteen. The nlilitary adnlinistration of the country \vas placed
in entire charge of Heku. Before this Heku exercised authority in an
arbitrary way, and corrupted the la\vs, cherishing feelings of disloyalty to
his Prince. The King (Munchu) \vas unable to control hiln. Hereupon
the King went hunting and stayed abroad for the night, and Heku sent a
robber who murdered him." Heku ,vas put to death in the follo\ving year.
   In 479 ,ve have the follo\ving :-" \Vinter, 11th month. King Sanlkeun
of Pekche died, and ,vas succeeded by Mute, son of King :\Iunchu's younger
brother Konchi.
   1 East Castle, probably in allusion to the Eastern situation of U ng-chin.

   ~ War is far off.
        3iO
         J26                             NII-IONGI.

           the land. Therefore \vith careful mind inciting m)"self, I have
           been every da)T \vatchful for that da)T, for the sake of the
           people. The Omi, the J\furaji and the Torno no Mi)"akko
           dail)T attend the court: the Governors of provinces and of
           districts in due season assemble in court. Ho\," shall the~y not
           \vith their \vhole hearts diligently observe the Imperial decrees?
           In principle our relation is that of Prince and vassal, but in
           feeling it is also that of father and child. It "vas rn)T hope that
XI\~. 49 b)T the help of the \yisdonl of the Omi and Muraji the hearts
           of the people both in the capital and else\vhere might be
           rejoiced, and I desired long to preserve peace throughout the
           Empire. But unexpectedly disease has come upon me. It
           has rooted itself deeper and deeper, and has greatl)" increased.
           This is the common lot of humanity', and is not \\Torth ,vasting
           \vords over.
              But in the capital and in the country the clothing and caps
           have not yet attained to freshness and neatness: civilization
           and Government still remain short of perfection. \\Then I
           begin to reflect on this, I am simply lost in chagrin. But
           it is now many years since I could be described as in the
           vigour of youth. M~y strength of body and of mind have
           together become worn out. \Vhat I now do is of course not
           for my o\vn benefit, but soleI)" from a desire to facilitate the
            nourishment of the people. Therefore is it that I do this.
            \Vhat one of the descendants of mankind is absent from my
           thought? For the sake of the Empire, private feelings
           should be severed. At the present time 1 Prince Hoshikaha
            cherishes treason in his heart. His conduct is \vanting in
           friendliness towards (his brethren).2 It has been said by' a
            man of old :-' There is no one who knows the minister so
            well as his Lord: there is no one who knows the child so ,veIl
            as his father.' Even supposing that Hoshikaha should make
            up his mind to unite (with his brethren) in ruling the State,
            certain disgrace \vould come universally upon the Omi and
            Muraji, and a cruel poison overflo\v the nation. No,v a bad
 XI\T. 50. descendant is to be dreaded for the people's sake: a good

           1   See p. 337.
           ~ "His brethren" is not in the    original, but there 15 an allusion to the
         Shooking (Legge, Vol. I I I. Pt. I I. p. 535), \\~here the cOlnplete phrase is
         found.
                               YURIAI(C.                                37 1
descendant is sufficient to sustain the burden of the Great
Task. l Although this is a matter concerning Our House, in
principle it does not admit of concealment. The Ohomuraji
and the officials of the Home Department are widespread and
pervade the whole country: the Prince Imperial, who is in the
position of becoming my successor, is known to the world for
his benevolence and filial piety. His conduct is such that he
is a sufficient person to carry out Our ideas. If along with
him ye administer the Empire, even although Our eyes are
closed, what room is there for repining? " ~
          In one book it is said :-" It is known to all the world
       that Prince Hoshikaha is of an evil disposition and of a
       violent heart. If unfortunately after Our death he should
       attempt to harm the Prince Imperial, ye and the officials
       of the Home Department are very numerous. Strive your
       utmost to render each other mutual aid, and let there be
       no contemptuousness."
     At this time Oshiro, Kibi no ami, General of the expedition
 against Silla, arrived at the province of Kibi, and passed by XIV. 51.
 his house. After,vards 500 Yemishi under his command,
 hearing of the Emperor's death, spoke to one another,
 saying :-" The Emperor who controls our country is dead.
 The opportunity should not be lost." So assembling- them-
 selves into a band, they invaded the neighbouring districts.
 Hereupon Oshiro came from his house, and meeting the
 Yemishi at Port Saba, 3 fought with them, and shot at the
 \'I'emishi. But some skipped and others lay down, thereby
succeeding in avoiding the arrows. In the end he was unable
 to shoot them. Therewith Oshiro twanged his empty bow by
 the sea-shore, and of the skippers and skulkers two companies
 \\"ere shot to death. 4 Two cases of arrows were all used up.
 So he called to boatmen and asked them for arrows. But
 they \vere afraid, and of their own accord retired. Then

  1 The sovereignty.

  t  This speech is copied, \vith SOIne unilnportant changes, from a passage
in a Chinese History of the Sui dynasty, \vhere it is assigned to the Emperor
Kaotsu, who died A.D. 604, i.e. 125 years afler the death of Yuriaku.
   S In SU\\'o.

   4 Chinese legend tnentions archers so skilful that they could shoot birds

and beasts \vithout any arrows \\'hatever.
       37
       J262                        N II-IONGI.
       Oshiro set up his bow, and taking it by the end, made a song,
       sayIng : -
                            On the "ray he met them,
                            The Boy of Oshiro!
                            It is in Heaven only that
                            Unheard of he \vill be,
                            For on Earth at least
                            He will be heard of.


            Having finished this song, he slew many men \vith his o\vn
         hane and pursued them on as far as Port U ragake in the Land
XIV. 52. of Tamba, where they were all massacred.
                One book says :-" He pursued them as far as U ragake,
             and then sent men who slew them all."
                           BOOK XV.

THE EMPEROR SHIRAGA 1 -TAKE-HIRO-KUNI-OSHI-WAKA-YAMATO-
                                 NEKO.


                       (SEINE/ 2 7ENNO.)

THE    Emperor Shiraga-take-hiro-kuni-oshi-waka-Yamato-neko
\\ras the third child of the Emperor Ohohatsuse-waka-take.
His mother's name was Katsuraki no Kara-hime. The
Emperor's hair was white 3 from his birth. When he grew up
to manhood, he loved the people. The Emperor Ohohatsuse
had a special admiration for him amongst all his children, and
in the 22nd year of his reign appointed him Prince Imperial.
The Emperor Ohohatsuse died in the 8th month of the 23rd
year of his reign. Then Kibi no Waka-hime secretly addressed
the Imperial Prince, the younger son Hoshikaha, saying:-
" If thou dost desire to ascend to the Imperial rank, do thou
first of all take the office of the Treasury." The eldest son,
the Imperial Prince Ihaki, hearing this advice of the Lady his
mother to her younger son, said :-" Although the Prince
Imperial is my younger brother, why should he be betrayed?
This thing should not be done." But Prince Hoshikaha
would not give ear. He rashly followed the advice of the
Lady his mother. Finally he took possession of the Treasury,
and locked the outer door, there\\Tith making provision against xv. 2.

  1 Shiraga means \vhite hair.    The" Kojiki "'gives his name as Shiraga
no oho-Yamato-neko.
  2 Seinei, pure and tranquil.

  3 The saine thing is related of the Chinese philosopher Laotze and other
Chinese \\'orthies.
      374
      J26                            NIHONGI.

       disaster. He exercised arbitrary authority, and squandered
       the official property. Hereupon Ohotomo no Muruya no Oho-
       muraji spake to Yamato no Aya no Tsuka no Atahe, saying:-
       c'The time has now come when the dying injunctions of the
       Emperor Ohohatsuse are to be fulfilled. It is meet that we
       should comply with them and do service to the Prince
       Imperial." So they raised an armed force and besieged the
       Treasury. They blockaded it from without, and setting fire
       to it, roasted to death the Imperial Prince Hoshikaha. At
       this time Kibi no Waka-hime, the Imperial Prince Ihaki, Ani-
       kimi,l his elder brother by a different father, and Ki no Okazaki
       no Kume 2 were roasted to death along with him. Then
       Wone, the Agata-nushi of Mino in Kahachi, in trepidation
       and alarm, burst away from the fire and made his escape. He
       embraced the legs of Ayahiko, Kishi of Kusakabe, and through
       him begged his life of the Ohomuraji, Ohotomo no Muruya,
       saying :-" Thy slave Wone, the Agata-nushi, was the faithful
       servant of the Imperial Prince Hoshikaha, but yet he was not
       rebellious towards the Prince Imperial. He prays that ~
       generous mercy be accorded him, and a human life spared.
       Accordingly Ayahiko represented this fully to Ohotomo, the
       Ohoffillraji, on his behalf, and he was not entered in the rank
       of those who were executed. Wone thereupon made repre-
       sentation to the Ohomuraji through Ayahiko, saying :-" My
        Lord Ohotomo the Ohonluraji, owing to thy great mercy
        bestowed on me, my life, which was in imminent danger, has
        been continued and lengthened so that I can see the light of
       day.'ll So he hastened to present to the Ohomuraji ten chi) of
xv. 3. rice-land at Ohowido in the villag-e of Kume in Naniha. He
        also presented rice-land to Ayahiko as a return for the favour
        shown him.
           In this month, the Omi of the upper province of Kibi,
        hearing of the disturbances at the Court, wished to aid their
        uterine brother, the Imperial Prince Hoshikaha, and came
        floating over the sea with a fleet of forty war vessels. When
        they arrived they heard of the roasting to death, and went
        away again without landing. The Emperor straightway sent

                    J   Or Ye-kilni. This name means elder Lord.
                    2   Probably {or KUHle no Muraji.
                              SEINEI.                              3i5
messengers to call the OIni 1 of Upper l{ibi to an account, and
to deprive them of the mountain Be of which they had
control.
   \Vinter, loth month, 4th day. The Ohomuraji, Ohotomo
no ~Iuruya, attended by the Omi and Muraji, delivered to the
Prince Imperial the Seal.
   1st year, Spring, 1st month, 15th day. The Emperor, by A.D. 4 80
command to the officials, prepared an arena at Mikakuri in
Ihare, and there assumed the Imperial Dignity. He at length
established his Palace, and honoured Katsuraki no Kara-hime
with the title of Grand Consort. 2 The Ohomuraji, Ohotomo
no I\furuya, \vas made Ohomuraji, and the Oho-omi of lVlatori
in Heguri was made Oho-omi, so that both were continued in
their former positions. The Omi, Muraji, and Torno no
 ~liyakko each took the rank belonging to their several offices.
   \Vinter, loth month, 9th day. The Emperor Ohohatsuse
was buried in the misasagi on the Takawashi plain in Tajihi.
At this time the Hayato lamented night and day beside the
misasagi, and refused the food \vhich was offered them. Seven
days passed, and then they died. The officials constructed a
mound to the north of the tumulus, where they were buried
with due ceremony. This \\tas the year Kanoye Saru (57th) of xv. 4·
 the Cycle.
    2nd year, Spring, 2nd nlonth. The Emperor, vexed that he A.D. 4 81 •
 had no children, sent the Ohomuraji, Ohotomo no Muruya, to
 the provinces, and established the Be of Shiraga no Toneri,:S
 the Be of Shiraga no Kashihade,4 and the Be of Shiraga no
 Yugehi,5 in the hope of leaving a trace which might be seen of
 posterity.
    Winter, 11th month. For the purpose of the offerings of
 the feast of first-fruits, Wodate, of the Be of Kume of Iyo,
 ancestor of the Yamabe no Muraji and Governor of Harima,
 \vas sent thither. In the new muro of Hosome, Miyakko

   1 No doubt the Yan1amori Be or Mountain wardens mentioned in the

reig-n of 6 ji n
   2 Kara-hin1e, not having been En1press, could not be appointed Grand

Elnpress like other Imperial relicts.
   :s Attendants.                             .. Ste\vards.
   ~ Lit. quiver-bearers, or archers, a part of the In1perial Guard. The
" Kojiki ~) Inentions only a Shiraga Be.
                                                              c c
        J26                           NIHONGI.

          of the Oshinomi Be and Obita of the granary of Shijimi in the
          district of Akashi, he saw Ohoke and Woke, sons of the
          Imperial Prince Oshiha of Ichinobe. He took them together
          reverently to his bosom, recognized them as his lords, and
          attended to their nurture with extreme care. From his own
          private. income he arranged for the construction of a palace of
          brushwood, in which he lodged them temporarily, and
  xv'. s. mounting a s\vift steed, hastened to inform the Emperor.
          The Emperor was astonished, and after exclaiming for a good
          while, he said with emotion :-" Admirable! Delightful!
          Heaven in its bountiful love has bestowed on us two children."
          In this month he sent Wodate with a token of authority, and
          some of the Toneri in attendance on him, to Akashi to meet
          them (and escort them back).
             The story 1 is given in the history of the Emperor \Voke..
A.D. 482.    3rd year, 1st month, 1st day. Wodate and his companions
          arrived in the province of Settsu, escorting Ohoke and \Voke.
          Then Omi and Muraji were sent, with emblems of authority
          and a royal green-canopied carriage/ to meet them and bring
          them into the Palace.
             Sumrner, 4th month, 7th day. Prince Ohoke was appointed
          Prince Imperial, and Prince Woke was made an Imperial
          Prince.
             Autumn, 7th month. Regina (princess) Ihito~yo primum
          eoivit eum marito in Palatio Tsunuzashi. Dixit alieui :-" Nunc
          aliquantum cognovi viam feminarum. Quid habet mirum in se ?
          Non sum cupida unquam rursus coeundi cum viro." [It is not
          clear that she had a husband at this time.]
             9th month, 2nd day. The Omi and Muraji were sent on
          circuit to inspect the manners and customs.
             Winter, loth month, 4th day. An edict was made pro-
          hibiting dogs, horses, and playthings from being offered to the
          Emperor. 3
  X'V. 6.    11th month, 18th day. The Omi and Muraji \vere feasted in
          the Great Court, and received presents of floss-silk. They
          J See below, XV. 8, also Ch. K., p. 328.
          2 This is purely Chinese. Motowori says that no such vehicles were ever
        known in Japan.
          3 These same ,vords are found In a History of the Chinese Sui Dynasty,

        under the year 581 A.D.
                                 KENZ6.                                  377
\vere all allo,ved to take as much as they pleased themselves,
and they \vent forth exerting their utmost strength.
   In this month, the various outlying provinces beyond the
sea all sent envoys with tribute.
  4th :year, Spring, 1St month, 7th day. The envoys of the A.D. 483-
various outl~ying provinces beyond the sea were feasted in the
Audience Hall, and received presents of various values.
   Summer, Intercalary 5th month. There was a national
drinking festival, which lasted five days.l
   Autumn, 8th month, 7th day. The Emperor personally
held an inspection ~ of prisoners. On this day the Yemishi
and Hayato together rendered homage.
   9th month, 1st day'. The Emperor was present in the Hall
of Archery. He invited the functionaries and the envoys froln
beyond the sea to join in the shooting. Each received presents
varying in value.
   5th year, 1St month, 16th day. The Emperor died in the A.D. 484.
Palace. His )Tears ,vere many.3
   Winter, 11th month, 9th day. He was buried in the misasagi
on the Sakata plain in Kahachi.




                         THE EMPEROR WOKE.                                       xv. 7.

                        (KENZO 4 TENNO.)

  The Emperor \'Yoke (other\\Tise called Kume no \Vakako)
was the grandchild of the Emperor Ohoye [, no Izaho-wake and
son of the Imperial Prince Ichinabe no Oshiha. His mother's
name was Hayehime.

   J The History of the Chinese Emperor Ming Ti' (5 8-75 A.D.) has mention

of a great drinking festival lasting five days.
                        'i
   2 \\7illianls says that   in this phrase lueans "to release." No doubt
the object ,vas to release such as \vere deserving of pardon.
   3 H is age is reckoned variously by other authorities at thirty-nine and
forty.one.
  .. Illustrious ancestry.
   5 His nan1e is not given else\vherc \vith the prefix Ohor e , which 111eanS
" great elder brother."
       J26                            NIHONGI.

              In the 'Genealog)7' it is said :-" The Imperial Prince
            Oshiha of Ichinobe took to wife Hayehime, daughter of
            Ari 110 Omi, and at length had by her three sons and two
            daughters. The first was named Winatsu hime, the second
            Prince Ohoke, also called Shima no Wakako, also called
            Ohoshi no Mikoto, the third was named Prince Woke, also
            called Kume no Wakako, the fourth ,vas named Princess
            Ihitoyo, also called Princess Oshinomibe, and the fifth
            Prince Tachihana. In one book Princess Ihitoyo is
            ranked above Prince Ohoke. Ari no Omi was the son of
            Hada no Sukune."
          The Emperor, having lived for a long time on the borders,
       was thoroughly acquainted with the miseries of the people, and
       whenever he saw them oppressed, he felt as if his own four
       members were plunged in a ditch. He dispensed virtuous in-
       fluence, he bestowed blessings; the regulations of government
       were everywhere enforced; charity was shown to the poor, and
       the husbandless were suppo-ted. The Empire rendered him
       cordial allegiance.
          In the loth month of the 3rd year of the Emperor Anaho,
       the Emperor's father, 1 the Imperial Prince Ichinobe no Oshiha
       ~"as slain, together with the Toneri, Saheki be no Nakachiko,
xv. 8. by the Emperor Ohohatsuse on the moor of Kaya. 2 They were
       accordingly buried in the same grave. Thereupon the Emperor 3
       and Prince Ohoke, hearing that their father had been shot to
       death, were afraid, and both escaped and hid themselves. The
       Toneri, Omi, Kusakabe no Muraji [Omi is the personal name of
        Kusakabe no Muraji], with his son Adahiko, secretly served the
       Emperor and Prince Woke, so that they avoided disaster by
       fleeing to the district of Yosa in the province of Tamba. Omi
       at length changed his name and called himself Tatoku, but
       being still afraid of being put to death, he fled from this place
       to a cave in Mount Shijimi in the province of Harima. There
       he strangled himself. The Emperor, being still ignorant
       whither Omi had gone, urged his elder brother, Prince Ohoke,
       to turn his steps towards the district of Akashi in the province
       of Harima. There they both changed their names to Tamba

             1   i.e. Emperor Woke's father.            t   See above, p. 336.
                                     3 Woke is meant.
                                KENZ6.                      379
no Waraha,1 and entered the service of the Obito of toe Shijimi
granarIes.
        The Obito of the Shijimi granaries was Hosome Oshi-
       nomi Be no Miyakko.
Adahiko at this time did not leave them, but remained constant
 to his duty as their vassal.
   In Winter, the 11th month of the 2nd year of the reign of
the Emperor Shiraga, the Governor of the province of Harima,
'VodateI:yo no Kumebe, ancestor of the Yamabe no Muraji,
went to the district of Akashi to make arrangements in person
for the offerings of the festival of first-fruits.
        One writing says :-" Went on a circuit to the kohori
      and agata 2 to collect the land tax."
   It so happened that he arrived just \vhen the Obito of the xv. 9·
granaries of Shijimi was holding a house-\varming for a new
muro and was extending tIle day by adding to it the night.
Hereupon the Emperor spake to his elder brother, Prince
Ohoke, saying :-" Many years have passed since we fled
hither to escape ruin. It belongs to this very evening to reveal
our names and to disclose our high rank." Prince Ohoke
exclaimed \vith pity :-" To rrlake such an announcement our-
selves would be fatal. Which of us could keep safe his person
and avoid danger?" The Emperor said :-" vVe, the grand-
sons of the Emperor Izahowake, are a man's drudges, and feed
his horses and kine. What better can we do than make known
our names and be slain? " At length he and Prince Ohoke fell
into each other's arms and wept, being unable to contain their
emotion. Prince Ohoke said :-" In that case who else but
thou, my younger brother, is capable of making a heroic effort,
and is therefore fit to make this disclosure?" The Emperor
refused firmly, saying :-" Thy servant has no ability. How
can he make so bold as to display virtuous action?" Prince
Ohoke said :-" There are here none to excel my younger
brother in ability and wisdom." And in this way they mutu-
ally held back each in favour of the other for two or three
times. It was ultimately arranged, with the Emperor's con-
sent, that he should make the announcement. Together they X\T. 10.
\\'ent to the outside of the muro and sat down in the lowest

         I   The boys of Talllba.          ~   Districts.
~80
 J26
;)                              NIHONGI.

place. The Obito of the granary ordered them to sit beside the
cooking-place and hold lights to right and left. When the-
night had become profound, and the revel was at its height,
and everyone had danced in turn, the Obito of the granary
addressed Wodate, saying :-" Thy servant observes that these
light.. holders honour others, and abase themselves; they put
others before, and themselves behind. By their respectfulness
they show their observance of just principles; by their retiring
behaviour they illustrate courtesy. They are worthy of the
name of gentlemen." Upon this Wodate played on the lute
and gave orders to the light-holders, saying :-" Get up and
dance." Then the elder and younger brothers declined in each
other's favour for a good while and did not get up. Wodate
urged them, saying :-" Wherefore all this delay? Get up
quickly and dance." Prince Ohoke got up and danced. When
he had done, the Emperor stood up in his turn, and having
adjusted his dress and girdle, proposed a health for the Muro,
saYing : -

The Dolichos roots 1 of the ne\v muro which he has upbuilt ;
The pillars which he has upbuilt-
These are 2 the calm of the august heart of the master of the house:
The ridge-poles which he has raised aloft-
These are the grove a of the august heart of the master of the house:
The rafters which he has set-
These are the perfect order of the august heart of the master of the house:
The laths \\,hieb he has placed-
These are the fairness of the august heart of the master of the house:



    I The Dolichos roots present a difficulty.    They are better kno\\Tn for
 yielding a starchy food like arrO\Vroot than as material for house-building.
 The stems are mentioned below. Another objection is that their introduc-
 tion here spoils the symmetry of the composition, ,vhich though not exactly
 poetry, is something closely verging on it. I \vould prefer to omit the words
 " Katsura ne tsuki-tatsuru" of the original, so that the first two lines would
 become only one, viz.-
            " The pillars of the new muro which he has upbuilt."

     i. e. represent.
     2

     Grove. The comn1entators say this means shigeki, thick, which In
     3
 Japanese is a metaphor for cordial, hearty, kind.
                                       KENZO.                                     J26

The Dolichos cords \\'hich he has tied- 1
These are the endurance of the august life of the 111aster of the house:
The reed-leayes it is thatched \vith-
These are the superabundance of the august \vealth of the Inaster of the X. V.             I I.

    house:

               On all sides 2 (of it) there are fields of fresh culture:
               With the tenoospan rice-ears,
               Of these fresh fields,
               I n a shallo\v pan
               \\'" e have bre\ved sake.
               \\Tith gusto let us drink it,
               o    Iny boys ~
               \Vheneyer \ve dance
               V plifting the horns of a buck 3
               Of these secluded hills
               (\Veary to the foot)
               S\veet sake from Vega Inarket-to\vn
                Not buying \vith a price,
               To the clear ring of hand-palms
                Ye ,vi11 revel,"
                Ob ~ my immortal ones! it

   When he had ended proposing this health, he sang to the
 accompaniment of music, saying : -
                                   •
                     The willo'" that gro\vs by the river-

    I i.e. tied the laths (of sedge) to the uprights of the \valls, \vhich \vere then

 plastered with a lnixture of Inud and stra".. The finnness \vith \vhich they
 \vere tied represents the endurance of the master's life.
    ~ In this passage, as in the \vell-kno\vn poern attributed to Susa no \VO, I
 have Yentured to render idzumo as equal to idzukulllO, on all sides, although
 \vlthout native authority.
    3 Animal dances, in which the performer represented a deer, \vild boar,

 butterfly, bird, etc., \vere common in ancient Japan. The Shishi luai, or
 lion-dance, danced by t\\"o boys, one of \"hom \vears a grotesque luask sup-
 posed to repres~nt a lion, and the other supports the body, made of cotton
 stuff, lnay still be seen in the streets.
     -I The \vord for "reyel" is uchi-age, \vhich ll1eans literally to strike up.

 But the uchi (strike) Inust also be taken \vith "hand-palrns" in the sense
 of "clapping."
     5 A \vay of saying, "May you live for ever ~"        In this passage the author
 had in mind a speech in Japanese, the original language of \vhich, although
  Inainly expressed by Chinese ideographs, can be conjectured \vith sOlne
 degree of certainty.
      ,; The first line of th15 poetn contains the single \\'ord Ina-nlushiro, ~, sleep-
           J26                               NIHONGI.

                              \Vhen the \\·ater has gone,
                              I t raises up (its stem that was) bent do\\rn,
                              i\nd its roots perish not.

             \Vodate addressed him, saying :-" Capital! Pray let us
           hear something more."
             The Emperor at length made a special dance,
                  This is what was anciently called a Tatsutsu (stand out)
               dance. The manner of it \vas that it \vas danced while
               standing up and sitting do,vn.
           and striking an attitude, said : -
                                    Of Yanlato,
                                      50so chihara
                                    Asach ihara t
                                     The younger Prince anl I.

xv. 12.     Hereupon \\Todate thought this profoundly strange, and
          asked him to say more. The Emperor, striking an attitude,
          said : -
                               The sacred cedar 2
                               Of Furu in Isonokatu i - 3
                               I ts stem is severed,
                               I ts branches are stripped off.
                               Of him \rho in the Palace of Ichinobe
                               (;overned all under Heaven,"
                               The myriad Heavens,
                               The l11yriad lands-
                               Of Oshiha no Mikoto
                               The august children are \ve. 5


           ing-ll1at" (a rice stra\v 111at), a cunventional epithet or makura-kotoba of
           kaha, skin, perhaps because the Japanese used skins for sleeping on at one
           time. It has, properly speaking, nothing to do with kaha, river, but the un..
           expected conjunction is \vitty-froln a Japanese point of vie\v. The allusion
           to the position of the two Princes is plain.
              J Chihara, or as it filay be read Ashihara, means reed plain, a poetical term

          for Japan. So so is interpreted as an onomatope representing the rustling
          of reeds. Asa is shallo\\', and asach ihara is said to be a plain on which the
          reeds gro,v short. The speech (or poem) is a (no doubt \vith intention)
          mysteriously \varded announcement of Woke's rank as an Imperial Prince.
             ~ The sugi or Cryptolueria Japonica.
             3 In Yamato.                     4 He never reigned.  See above, p. 336.
             :J There is hardly any l11etre here.     This passage is just on the border
          line bet\veen poetry and prose.
                                  KENZO.                                   J26

   W odate was greatly astonished. He left his seat, and, vexed
with himself,· made repeated obeisance to them. He under-
took to provide for them, and brought his people to prostrate
themselves reverently. Then he levied all the inhabitants of
that district, and in a fe\v days built a palace, in which the
Princes \vere temporarily lodged. Going up to the capital, he
asked that some one should be sent to meet the two Princes.
The Emperor Shiraga was rejoiced to hear this, and exclaimed,
sa)~ing :-" \Ve have no children; \ve must make them our
successors." Along \vith the Oho-omi and the Ohomuraji,
he settled on a plan \vithin the forbidden precinct. 2 So
 I{umebe no Wodate, the Governor of Harima, \vas sent with
emblems of authority, and accompanied by personal attendants
of the Emperor, to go to 111eet them at Akashi. In Spring,
the 1st month of the third year of the Emperor Shiraga, the
 Emperor,~ \vith Prince Ohoke, arrived at the province of Settsu,
 \vhere Omi and Muraji ,,'ere sent \vith emblems of authority xv. 13-
and a Royal green-canopied carriage to meet them and bring
them into the Palace. III Sumn1er, the 4th month, Prince Ohoke
\vas appointed Prince Imperial, and the Emperor ,vas raised to
the rank of Imperial Prince.
   In Spring, the 1st month of the 5th year of his reign, the
Emperor Shiraga died. In this month the Prince Imperial
 Ohoke and the Emperor ceded to each other the Dignity, and
 for a long time did not occupy it. Therefore the Emperor's
 elder sister/ the Imperial Princess A\vo of Ihi-toyo, held a Court
 and carried on the Government in the Palace of Tsunuzashi In
 Oshinomi, styling herself Oshinomi no Ihitoyo no Awo no
 Mikoto. A poet of that day made a song, saying:-
                            In Yalnato
                            What I long to see
                            Is the Tsunuzashi Palace
                            In this Takaki ;)
                            Of Oshinolni.

  \\Tinter, 11th month. Ihitoyo, A,vo no Mikoto died. She was
buried in the misasagi on the Hill of Haniguchi in Katsuraki.
      1   For the neglect shown to the Princes.
     2    A Chinese term for the Palace.                  3 \liz. 'Yoke.
          The" Kojiki " makes her his n1aternal aUnt.
          Takaki Ineans high castle, but is here the name of a place.
        J26                             NII-IONGI.

           12th month. There was a great assembly' of the officials, at
        which the Prince Imperial Ohoke took the Imperial Seal, and
        placing it on the seat occupied by the Emperor, did him
        repeated obeisance. He then took his place among the
        Ministers, and said :-" This rank of Emperor should be occu..
        pied by a man possessed of merit. The disclosure of our rank,
        and our being sent for by the late Emperor, is all a result of
        the policy of my younger brother. I resign the Empire in his
        favour." The Emperor, on the other hand, resigned it on the
        grounds that as a younger brother he might not presume to
        assume the Dignity, and also because he was aware that the
        Emperor Shiraga had appointed his elder brother Prince
        Imperial with the previous purpose of transmitting it to him.
xv. 14. For these two reasons he firmly declined, saying :-" When the
        sun and moon appear, is it not impossible that a candle should
        not give way before their radiance? When a seasonable rain
        falls, is it not superfluous trouble to go on watering from a
        pond? 1 The conduct which should be esteemed by him who
        is in the position of a younger brother is to serve his elder
        brother by devising methods of averting from him disaster, to
        illustrate virtue, and to unravel complications without putting
        himself forward. For if he puts himself forward, he will be
        wanting in the reverence which is due from a younger brother.
        Woke cannot bear to put himself forward. 2 It is an immutable
        law that the elder brother should be affectionate and the
        younger brother reverent. So I have heard from our elders.
        How can I of myself alone make light of it ?" The Prince
        Imperial Ohoke said :-" The Emperor Shiraga, by reason of
        my being the elder brother, at first assigned to me all the
        affairs of the Empire. But I am ashamed to accept it. Now
        the great Prince's conduct is established in beneficial retire..
        ment,3 so that those who hear him utter sighs of admiration.

         1   From" \Vhen " to "pond" is taken from a Chinese book.
         S   From "The conduct" to "forward" is imitated from a passage in the
        'Liki."
         ;} He probably makes allusion to the Yih-king, Diagram xxxiii. Sect. 6,
       which is thus translated by Legge: "The sixth line, undivided, sho\vs its
       subject retiring in a noble way. It "till be advantageous in every respect."
       This means, perhaps, that his n10dest behaviour proves that his reign \\"ill be
       beneficial to the people.
                               KENZ6.                               J26

He has displayed the qualities of an Imperial scion, so that all
who see him let fall tears. The pitiable gentry \\~ill rejoice to
bear the gladness of sustaining the Heavens: the wretched
black-haired people will be delighted to enjoy the happiness of
treading the earth. Therewith the four corners of the earth
will be made solid, so as to flourish perpetually to ten thousand
ages. His meritorious work will approach that of creation; X\t. 15
his honest policy will illuminate the age. How pre-eminent!
How recondite 1 \\' ords fail me to describe. How shall
I, albeit his elder, put myself forward before him? If, having
no merit, I should accept the throne, self-reproach would
surely be the result. I have heard that the office of Emperor
ought not to remain long vacant, and that the will of Heaven
should not be evaded out of humility. Let the Great Prince
make the Temples of the Earth and of Grain his thought, and
let him make the. people his heart." As he uttered these
words, his earnest emotion led him to shed tears. Upon this
the Emperor saw that if he persisted in his refusal to come
forward, he would be 1 acting contrary to his elder brother's
wishes, and gave his consent. But he would not take his place
on the Imperial throne. The world was rejoiced to see how
well they sincerely yielded in each other's favour, and said:-
" Excellent! With such good feeling between elder and
younger brother, the Empire will tend to virtue: with such
love between relations, the people will stimulate benevolence."
   1st year, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. The Oho-omi and the A.D. 485-
Ohumuraji made a representation to the Emperor, saying:-
"The Prince Imperial Ohoke, out of the abundance of his X\T. 16.
wisdom, has delivered over the Empire. Your Majesty, in his
rightful governance, ought to accept the vast inheritance, and
thus becoming the Lord of the Temple of Heaven, to continue
the infinite line of his ancestors, so as, above, to correspond to
the mind of Heaven, and, below, to satisfy the hopes of the
people. To refuse to enter upon the Dignity would be to cause
the destruction of the hopes of all the Gold and Silver 2 frontier
lands, and of all the functionaries both far and near. It belongs

  1 The" Nihongi" introduces a   ;r;    (not) here. The" Kiujiki" reading
seems preferable, and I have followed it in the'translation..
  2 Corea is called the gold and silver country at p. 22 I
        J26                       NIHONGI.

        to you by the will of Heaven, and has been ceded to you by
        the Prince Imperial. Your wisdom is abundant, and your good
        fortune conspicuous. While young you were diligent, humble,
        respectful, affectionate and docile. May it please you to
        comply with the command of your elder brother, and take
        over the conduct of the great undertaking.·' The Emperor
        made an order, saying :-" Be it so.'''' Accordingly he summoned
        the Ministers of State and the functionaries to the Yatsuri
        Palace in Hither Asuka, and there assumed the Imperial
        Dignity, and the functionaries entered upon office, to the great
        delight of all.
xv. 17·         One book says the Emperor Woke had two palaces, one
             at Wono, the other at Ikena. Another book says that he
             made his palace at Mikakuri.
           In this month, Princess Wono of Naniha was appointed
        Empress, and a general amnesty was made.
                Princess W ono of N aniha was the daughter of Prince
             Wakugo of Oka, grandson of Prince Ihaki, who was the
             great-grandson of the Emperor W o-asatsuma-wakugo no
             Sukune.
           2nd month, 5th day. 1"'he Emperor spoke, saying :-" The
        late Prince, having met with much misfortune, lost his life on
        a desert moor. We were then a child, and fled away and
        concealed Ourselves. Then, by a piece of undeserved good
        fortune, We were sought out and sent for, and were raised up
        to continue the Great Work. We have searched for his
        honoured bones far and wide, but there is no one who can tell
        where they are." Having finished speaking, the Emperor and
        the Prince Imperial Ohoke burst into tears of passionate
        emotion, which they could not control.
           In this month the Emperor summoned together the old
        people, and in person made inquiry of them bne after another.
        Now there was one old woman who came forward and said : -
        "Okime knows where the honoured bones were buried, and
        begs permission to point out the place to the Emperor."
                Okime was the old woman's name. It is stated below
             that the younger sister of Yamato-bukuro no Sukune,
             ancestor of the Kimi of Mount Sasaki in the province of
             Ohomi, was called Okime.
           Thereupon the Emperor and the Prince Imperial Ohoke,
                                      KENZQ.                                    J26

  taking with them the old \vornan, made a progress to the moor
  of Raya in Kutawata in the province of Ohomi, where they dug
 them up, and found that it was really as the old woman had
 said. Looking down into the grave, they made lament, and
 their words showed deep and passionate feeling.          From
 antiquity until now never \vas there anything so cruel. The xv. 18.
 body of N akachiko 1 lay across the honoured bones, and \vere
 mixed with them so that it was impossible to distinguish them
 from one another. Then there .appeared the nurse of the
 Imperial Prince Ihazaka, who made representation to the
 Emperor, saying :-" The upper teeth of Nakachiko had fallen
out, so that by this they can be distinguished." But although
 they were able, in accordance with the nurse's words, to dis-
 tinguish the skulls, they never succeeded in separating the
 bones of the four members. Accordingly a pair of misasagi
 were erected on the moor of Kaya resembling each other, so
that they seemed but one. The funeral rites also were alike.
The Emperor ordered the old woman, Okime, to live in the
neighbourhood of the palace, \vhere he treated her with respect
and showed her kindness, not allowing her to be in want.
    In this month he made an order, saying :-" Old woman!
thou art desolate and infirm, and walking is not convenient for
thee. Let there be a rope stretched across to support thee
when thou goest out and eornest in. And let there be a bell
attached to the end of the rope, so that there may be no need
for anyone to announce thee. \Vhen thou earnest, ring this
bell, and we shall know that thou art coming." Herewith the
old woman, in obedience to the Imperial order, rang the bell
before she eame forward. The Emperor, hearing from afar the
sound of the bell, made a song, saying : -
                              Past Wosone,
                              In Asajihara,
                                              .
                              The far.. extendIng {11100r
                                                    bell ·'
                             There the bell tinkles ~
                             Okin1e luust be coming ! 2

  1  See above, XIV. 5.
   2 The point of this poeln is not to be expressed in English.          It rests on
the simiJarity of the first syllable of nute, bell, ,vith nu, a 11100r, \vhich Inust
be read twice in different senses. The first half of the paetll takes nu in the
latter sense. \Vith the latter half it is only the first syllable o.f nu/e.
        J26                            NIHONGI.

           3rd month, 1st day of the Serpent 1 (the 2nd). The Emperor
        went to the Park, and there held revel by the ,vinding streams.
xv. 19.    Summer, 4th month, 11th day. The Emperor made an
        order, sa:ying :-" The means by which a sovereign encourages
        the people is no other than the granting of office: that by
        which a country is exalted is naught else but the granting of
        rewards for merit. Now the former Governor of Harima,
        Kumebe no \Vodate [his other name was Ihadate], sought Us
        out, came to meet Us, and raised Us up. His merit is
        manifold. Let him not hesitate to express his wishes."
        Wodate thanked the Emperor, saying :-" The mountain
        office 2 has always been my desire." He was appointed to the
        mountain office, and a new title was granted him, viz. the
        House of the Yamabe no Muraji. 3 Kibi no Omi '\tas associated
        with him, and the Yamamori Be were made their serfs. The
        Emperor praised his good qualities, made conspicuous his
        deserts, sho\ved gratitude for his services, requited his kindness,.
        and treated him with the utmost affection. His prosperity was·
        unequalled.
           5th month. Karabukuro no Sukune, Kimi of Mount Sasaki,
        ,vho was implicated in the assassination of the Imperial Prince
        Oshiha, when about to be executed, bo\ved down his head to
        the ground, and his words expressed extreme sorrow. The
         Emperor could not bear to put him to death, so he added
        him to the misasagi guardians, making him at the same time
        mountain-warden, 4 and erasing his name from the census
        registers. He was then handed over to the jurisdiction of the
         Yamabe no Muraji. a

          1 This unusual ,yay of designating the day of the month suggests that a
        different document is here quoted frolll.
          2 i.e, Warden of the Mountains, or, as \ve should say, "\N"oods and

        Forests." I t included the charge of game.
          ~ Muraji of the Mountain Be.                 4 Gan1e·keeper

          a The erasure of his nanle froln the register ,,'as on account of his being
        attached to the service of the Inisasagi ; the 1110untain \vardenship placed
        hiln under the jurisdiction of the Yanlabe no Muraji.
           May not these guardians of the In1perial tOlnbs have been among the
        ancestors of the Eta or Hinin, a pariah caste (abolished by the revolution of
        1868), who lived in villages by thelnselves, and did not intennarry \vith
        or have any social intercourse \vith other Japanese? They follo\ved
        the occupations of leather-dressers, shoelnakers, buriers of dead ani111als,
                                KENZ6.                                 J26

   But Yamato-bukuro no Sukune, by reason of the good ser-
vices of his younger sister, Okime, was granted his original
title, namely, the House of the Kimi of Mount Sasaki.
   6th month. The Emperor visited the Hall of Avoidance xv. 20.
of the heat, and had tnusic there. The Ministers were as-
sembled, and a banquet was prepared for them.
   This year was the year Kinoto U shi (2nd) of the Cycle.
   2nd year, Spring, 3rd month, 1st day of the Serpent (2nd).   A.D. 486.

The Emperor went to the Park, where he held revel by the
winding streams. At this time he assembled in great numbers
the Ministers, the High Officials, the ami, the Muraji, the
 Kuni no Miyakko, and the Torno no Miyakko, and made revel.
The Ministers uttered reiterated cries of "Long live the
 Emperor." 1
    Autumn, 8th month, 1st day. The Emperor addressed the
 Prince Imperial Ohoke, saying :-" Our father the late
Prince was, for no crime, slain with an arrow shot by the
Emperor Oho-hatsuse, and his bones cast away on a moor.
 Even until now, I have been unable to get hold of him, and
my bosom is filled with indignation. I lie down to weep, and
as I walk abroad I cry aloud. It is my desire to wash away
the disgrace cast on us by our enemy. Now, I have heard
 that no one should live under the same Heaven as his father's
 enemy, that no one should lay aside arms against the enemy
of his brother, that no one should dwell in the same country
\vith the enemy of his comrade. Even the son of a common
 man, rather than serve with the enemy of his parents, sleeps
 on a coarse mat, and making a pillow of his buckler, refuses
office. He will not dwell in the same country as his enemy, but
 whenever he meets him, in market or in Court, will not lay
aside his weapon until he has encountered him in combat.
 Much more I who, two years ago, was raised to the rank of xv. 21.
 Son of tleaven! It is lny desire to demolish his misasagi,

executioners, and watchlnen of cemeteries. The name Hinin (not-man)
accords ,veIl \v ith the Clrcumstance ll1entioned here of their names being
erased froln the census registers. They ,vere supposed to belong to the
service of the dead, and no longer to be reckoned with the living.
   Most of the Inisasagi had from one to five guardians 1 houses allotted to
them.
  1 Ban-zai or Man-zai, lit. 10,000 years.   This terln is still in use.
        390                             NIHONGI.

         to crush his bones, and fling them broadcast. Wauld it not
         be a filial act to take revenge in this wa~y?" The Prince
         Imperial Ohoke could hardly answer for sighing and sobbing.
         He remonstrated with the Emperor, saying :-" It is not well
        to do so. The Emperor Oho-hatsuse presided over the
         Empire as the rightful director of the myriad machinery of
        Government. Court and country looked up to him with joy.
         He was an Emperor, whereas the late Prince our father,
        although an Emperor's son, met with obstacles in his career,
        and never rose to the Imperial Dignity. Looking on the
        matter in this light, there is the difference of exalted and base.
        And if thou hadst the heart to demolish the misasagi, who
        would recognize as Lord and do service to the Soul of Heaven?
        This is one reason why the tomb should not be destroyed.
        Moreover, had it not been for the warm affection and special
        favour bestowed on the Emperor and Ohoke by the Emperor
        Shiraga, wouldst thou ever have attained to the precious Dignity?
        But the Emperor Oho-hatsuse was the father of the Emperor
        Shiraga. Ohoke has heard that it has been said by all the
        ancient sages, 'Without words there can be no response;
        without virtue there is no requital.' 1 If there is cause for
        gratitude, and no return is made, this is profoundly prejudicial
        to good nlorals. Your Majesty feasts the Country, and his
        virtuous conduct is felt far and wide over the Empire. But
        if he pulls down the misasagi, and shows himself ill an oppo-
        site light to Court and Country, Ohoke fears that it will become
        impossible to govern the land and to bring up the people as
xv. 22. his children. This is a second reason why it should not be
        destroyed." The Emperor said, "It is well," and counter-
        manded the work. 2
         1  Virtue is in Chinese active, not nlerely the negation of vice.
         2  The" Kojiki " tells a somewhat different story. v~·de Ch. K., p. 330. This
       misasagi (which I have visited) is at the present day a round single 1110und,
       encircled by a moat, but there are sufficient renlains of the second mound
       and of the original nloat to show that it ".as once a double-topped misasagi
       of the ordinary type. See above, p. 136. A large quantity of earth must
       have been removed in order thus to deprive this tomb of its distinctive
       character as an Imperial tumulus, and to give it the appearance of the tomb
       of a mere subject. It appears as if both the "Nihongi" and "Kojiki"
       regarded the demolition of a misasagi as an ilnpiol1s action, and tried to
       minilnize it.
                                   KENZO.                                  39 1
   9th month. Okime, being decrepit from old age, asked
leave to return to her home, saying :-" My vigour has
decayed. I am old, infirm, and elnaciated. Even with the
help of the rope I am unable to walk. I pray thee let me
return to my native place,l so that there I may spend my last
days." When the Emperor heard this he ,vas moved \vith
pity. He gave her a present of a thousand pieces, and
grieving in anticipation at the divergence of their paths, he
repeatedly lamented that they could no longer meet. So he
gave her a song. saying : -
                        Dh! Okime!
                        Okime of Afumi ~
                        From to-morro\v,
                        Hidden by the deep nlountains,
                        Thou \vilt no more be seen !

   Winter, loth month, 6th day'. The Emperor entertained
his Ministers. At this time the Empire was at peace; the
people were not subjected to forced labour, the crops reached
maturity, and the peasantry were prosperous. A measure of
rice was sold for one piece of silver,! and horses and kine
covered the moors.
   3rd year, Spring, 2nd month, 1st day. Kotoshiro Ahe no A.D. 48 7.
Omi, acting by Imperial command, went on a mission to Jmna.
Hereupon the Moon-God, by the mouth of a certain man, xv. 23·
addressed him, saying :-" My ancestor Taka-mimusubi had
the merit in conjunction (with other Deities) of creating
Heaven and Earth. Let him be worshipped by dedicating to
him people and land. I am the Moon-God, and I shall be
pleased if an offering is made according to his desire." Koto-
shiro accordingly returned to the capital, and reported these

  1 Lit., The Mulberry and Euphorbia trees.   There is an allusion to a
verse in the "Chinese Book of Odes" (Legge, Vol. IV. p. 337) : -
          " Even the tnulberry trees and the tsze (of one's home)
            Must be reg-arded with reverence."
  1   This is the first luention of coin in the" Nihongi."  It is ilnpossible to
say what the measure of rice was, or \vhat the value of the coin.       Indeed,
I take the whole passage to be a flight of the author's fancy, stimulated by
his recollections of Chinese literature. I t contains several phrases borro\\'ecl
froul Chinese ,,'orks. See Index-Currency.
                                                                   D   d
       39 2                             NIHONGI.

       thin~s fully to  the Emperor. The Utaarasu rice-fields were
        dedicated to the God, and Oshimi no Sukune, the ancestor of
        the Agatanushi of Yuki, was appointed to attend upon his
         shrine.
           3rd month, 1st day of the Serpent (8th). The Emperor
        went to the Park, where he held revel by the winding
        streams.
           Summer, 4th month, 5th day. The Sun-Goddess, by the
        mouth of a certain man, addressed Kotoshiro, Ahe no Omi,
        saying :-" Let the Ihare rice-fields be dedicated to my
        ancestor Taka-mimusubi." Kotoshiro accordingly reported
        the matter to the Emperor, and in compliance with the
        Goddess's request, fourteen cho 1 of rice-land were dedicated to
        him. The Atahe of Shimo no agata in Tsushima was ap-
        pointed to attend upon his shrine.
xv. 24.    13th day. The Saki-kusa Be ~ was established.
           25th day. The Emperor died in the palace of Yatsuri.
           In this year, Ki no Ohiha no Sukune, bestriding and
        making a base of Imna, held communication with Koryo. In
        order to rule the three Han on the west, he established a
        government, and styled himself a Deity. By means of a plan
        laid by Cha-ro·na-kwi and Tha-kap-syo of Imna he slew
        Mak-ni-ke, the heir to the throne of Pekche, at Irin.s [This is
        a place in Koryo.] He built the castle of Te-san,4 and then
        stood on the defensive as regards the Eastern province, cutting
        off the harbour by which supplies were transported, and caus-
        ing the army to suffer from famine. The King of Pekche was
        greatly enraged, and despatched General Ko-ni-ke and an
        officer of the military store department, named Mak-ko-ke, in
        command of troops to Te-san, to lay siege to it. Upon this,
        Ohiha no Sukune moved forward his army, and attacked them
         1 See below, xxv. 18.
         2 Saki-kusa is literally the herb of happiness. I t is also called man~nen­
       gusa, or the " herb of 10,000 years." It was said to gro\\' in the Court of the
       Temple to the sovereign's ancestors. The" Seishiroku" says :-" In the
       reign of the Emperor Kenzo, the officials were summoned to a banquet.
       At this time, a herb of three stems was gro",·jng in the courtyard of the
       palace. One of these ,vas plucked up and presented to the EUlperor, who
       thereupon conferred on the donor the title of Saki Be no Miyakko."
         3 Irin is called in Ojin's reign, year 16, a place in Imna.

         4 The Kana rendering is Shitoromo or Shitoromure.
                                 NINKEN.                                  393
with continually growing valour. All that opposed him were
put to the rout. But he was but one against a hundred.
Suddenly his weapons ran short, and his power became ex-
hausted. He saw that he could not bring matters to a con-
clusion, and returned from Imna. Consequently the Land of
Pekche sle\v Cha-ro-na-kwi, Tha-kap-syo, and their people-
more than three hundred men. l




                         THE EMPEROR OHOKE. ~                                     xv. 27·

                        (NINKEN3 TEJ.'VNO.)

  The Emperor Ohoke's personal name was Ohoshi. 4
         Otherwise Ohosu. This is the only instance of an
     Emperor's personal name· or designation being stated.
     I t is taken from an old manuscript.
  His designation was Shima no Iratsuko.' He was the elder
brother by the same mother of the Emperor Woke. In his
childhood he was intelligent, of quick parts and great attain-
ments. When he grew to man's estate, he was kind, indulgent
and gentle.
  At the death of the Emperor Anaho, he took refuge in the

   1 The" Tongkam " does not mention this affair, but there is no reason to

doubt that the" Nihongi" narrative is substantially true.
   The" Kojiki~' practically ends here. Nominally, it is carried down to
the death of Suiko in A.D. 628, but all after this is mere genealogy.
   2 Also read Oke.    Ohoke is the" Kojiki " reading.
   3 Benevolent-talented.

   4 Big-leg or big-foot.  The nalne is written above, XV. 7, with characters
which mean big-stone.
   5 Or taboo name.     In China the use of the personal rtame is not thought
respectful except by a chief or parent. I nstead of it the designation {!.:j':)
is used. The latter was assumed at the age of fifteen (or t\venty), when the
ceremony of capping took place. In writing the personal names of the
Emperors of the reigning dynasty, the Chinese are careful to alter one or
two strokes of the character..
   () Shilna no Wakako, abo\'e, XV, 7.
        394                           NIHONGI.

          district of Yosa in the province of Tamba. In the first year of
          the reign of the Emperor Shiraga, Winter, 11th month, Wodate,
          Yamabe no Muraji, Governor of Harima, went to the Capital
          and requested permission to go to fetch him. The Emperor
          Shiraga accordingly caused \Vodate, provided with symbols of
          authority, and accompanied by his own personal attendants, to
          proceed to Akashi, and respectfully to go to meet him. Ulti-
          mately, in the third year of his reign, Summer, the 4th month,
          the Emperor Ohoke was appointed Prince Imperial. 1 In his
          fifth year, the Emperor Shiraga died, and the Emperor abdi-
          cated the Empire in favour of the Emperor Woke, becoming
          Prince Imperial as before. In the third year of his reign,
          Summer, the 4th month, tIle EIl1perOr Woke died.
A.De 488.    1st year, Spring, 1st month, 5th day. The Prince Imperial
          assumed the Imperial rank in the Palace of Hirotaka in Isono-
          kami.
                  One book says :-" There were two palaces of the
                Emperor 0110ke, the first at Kahamura,~ the second at
                Takano in Shijimi. The pillars of the Hall remain un-
                decayed until this day."
 xv. 26. 2nd month, 2nd day. His former consort, the Imperial
          Princess Kasuga no Oho-iratsume,8 was appointed Empress.
                  The Princess Kasuga no Oho-iratsume ,vas the daughter
                of the Emperor Oho-hatsuse by Woguna Kimi, -daughter
                of Fukame, Wani no Omi.
             She at length bore to him one son and six daughters. The
          first ,vas called the Imperial Princess Takahashi no Oho-
          iratsume; the second ,vas called the Imperial Princess Asat-
          suma; the third was called the Imperial Princess Tashiraga ;
          the fourth was called the Imperial Princess Kusuhi; the fifth
          was called the Imperial Princess Tachibana; the sixth was
          called the Emperor Wo·hatsuse no Waka-sazaki. When he
          came to possess the Empire, he made his capital at Namiki in
          Hatsuse. The seventh was called the Imperial Princess
          Mawaka. 4

              This is a curious way of putting it, but the original is so.
              1

            2 This is the temporary palace built by Wodate. See above, XV. 5.
            3 See above, XIV. 7, for an account of·her birth.

            4 The" Kojiki " makes Mawaka a Prince.
                           NINKEN.                          395
        One book has a different arrangement, the Imperial
      Princess Kusuhi taking the third place and the Imperial
      Princess Tashiraga the fourth.
   Next there was Nuka-kimi no Iratsume, daughter of Hiuri,
Wani no Omi, who bore one daughter who was made the
Imperial Princess Kasuga no Yamada.
        One book says :-" Ohonuka no Iratsume, daughter of
      Hifure, Wani no ami, bore one daughter who was made
      the Imperial Princess Yamada no Oho-iratsume, also
      called the Imperial Princess Akami." Notwithstanding
      the trifling difference of the documents, the facts are the
      same.
  Winter, loth month, 3rd da)T. The Emperor Woke was
buried in the misasagi on the hill of Ihatsuki at Kataoka.
  This year was the year Tsuchinoye Tatsu (5th) of the Cycle.
   2nd year, Autumn, 9th month. The Empress Naniha no A.D. 489..
W ono, fearful on account of her long-standing want of respect
(for the Emperor), died by her own hand.                          xv. 27·
        One authority says :-" In the time of the Emperor
      Woke, the Prince Irilperial Ohoke was present at a
      banquet. He took up a melon to eat, but there was no
      knife. The Emperor Woke himself took a knife and com-
      manded his wife W ono to carry it and present it to the
      Prince Imperial. She came before him, and, in a standing
      position, laid the knife on the melon tray. Moreover,
      on the same day, she poured out sake, and, in a standing
      position, gave it to the Prince Imperial to drink. In con-
      sequence of this disrespect, she feared to be put to death,
      and died by her own hand."
   3rd year, Spring, 2nd month, 1st day. The Isonokami Be A.D. 490..
of palace attendants 1 was established.
   4 th year, Summer, 5th month. Kashima Ikuba no Omi and A.D .. 49 1•
Hobe no Kimi, being guilty of crimes, were both thrown into
prison, where they died.
   5th year, Spring, 2nd month, 5th day. General search was A.D. 497
made in the provinces and districts for the dispersed Saheki Be,
and a descendant of N akachiko of the Saheki Be was made
Saheki no Miyakko.

                            1   Toneri.
        394                            NIHONGI.

                Nakachiko of the Saheki Be is mentioned in the history
              of the reign of vVoke Tenno.
A.D. 493.   6th year, Autumn, 9th month, 4th .ay. Hitaka no Kishi
          was sent to Corea to fetch skilled artizans. This autumn, after
 xv. 28. Hitaka no Kishi was despatched, there was a \voman dwelling
          at Mitsu 1 in Naniha who made lament, saying:-

                         \'Toes me, my youthful 2 spouse!
                         For to me he is an elder brother,
                         And to my mother too an elder brother.


           The sound of her lament was exceeding pathetic, even to the
         rending of men's bowels. 3 A man of the village of Hishiki,
         named Kaso, hearing it, came in front of her, and said:-
         "\Vhy is thy lamentation so exceedingly sorrowful? '" The
         \voman answered and said :-" Think of the autumn garlic's
         ever clustering growth." 4 Raso said :-" Thou art right.
         Now I understand what thou hast said." But a companion of
         his, not comprehending her meaning, inquired, saying :-" By
         what dost thou understand?" He answered and said:-
 xv. 29. "Funame of the Naniha Jewellers' Be was wedded to Karama
         no Hataye fJ and bore to him Nakume," who was wedded to a
         man of Sumuchi named Yamaki and bore to him Akitame.
         Karama no Hataye and his daughter Nakume having both died,
         Yamaki, the man of Sumuchi, had illicit intercourse with
         Funame 7 of the Jewellers' Be, and had by her a son named
         Araki, who took to wife Akitame. Upon this Araki set out for
         Karyn in the suite of Hitaka no Kishi. Therefore his wife
         Akitame, restless and full of longing, has lost her wits and
         become distraught, and the sound of her lamentation is very
         touching, even to the rending of men's bowels."
                Funame of the Jewellers' Be and Karama no Hataye
              became husband and wife, and had a daughter named


          1 The aug-ust harbour.                  ~ Literally young herb or grass.
          3 Cf. the Biblical expression "bowels of compassion."
          4 By the clusters of the garlic bulbs in autumn she indicates the some-

        what complicated family relations described belo\v.
           Kara-fisher's-field.             6 The (profe)sional) weeping WOlnan.

           His ,vife's lllother.' This union ,vas regarded as incestuous.
                              NINKEN.                             397
     Nakume. y~an1aki, a man of Sumuchi, married Nakume,
     and had a daughter named Akitame. Yamaki's wife's
     father Karama no Hataye and the latter's child Nakume
     having both died, Yamaki, the man of Sumuchi, had an
     amour with his wife's mother, Funame of the Jewellers'
     Be, the fruit of which ,"ras Araki. Araki took to \vife
     Akitame. One book says :_H Funame of the Jewellers'
     Be bore Nakume to her first husband Karama no Hataye ;
     again to her second husband Yamaki, a man of Sumuchi,
     she bore Araki, so that Nakume and Araki were sister and
     brother by a different father. Consequently Nakume's
     daughter Akitame called Araki 1 her mother's elder brother.
     Nakume having married Yamaki, bore Akitame. More-
     over, Yamaki having had illicit intercourse with Funame
     had by her Araki, so that Akitame and Araki were sister
     and brother by a different mother. Consequently Akitame
     called Araki her elder brother. In ancient times women
     called their brothers se :3 (elder brother), without distiaction
     of age; while men called their sisters imo (younger sister).
     Hence the expression, 'To m~y mother an elder brother, to
     me an elder brother.' " 3
  In this year Hitaka no Kishi returned from Koryo, and
delivered to the Emperor the artizans Sunyuki and Nonyuki. 4
They were the ancestors of the Koryo tanners of the village
of N ukada in the district of Yamabe in the province of
Yamato.
  7th year, Spring, 1st month, 3rd day. \Vo-hatsuse Waka- A.n. 4Q4.
                                                                      xv. 30.
sazaki no Mikoto was appointed Prince Imperial.
   8th year, Winter, loth month. The people said :-" At this A.D. 495.
time there is peace throughout the land; the officials fill their
offices worthily. Everywhere within the seas there is a move-
ment towards good feeling; the subjects pursue peacefully
their avocations." This year the five grains were produced in
abundance, the silk\vorm and wheat afforded a rich harvest.

  1 In the speech above quoted.
  2 Se and itno also mean respectively husband and w·ife.
  a This note is fr0111 the "Shiki" or " Scholiast."
  . Possibly the Japanese reading of the characters is preferable, viz.
Stu:uki, TOfUki.
                                  NIHONGJ.
        394
          Far and near there \vas purit~y and calm, and the population
          multiplied.
A.D. 498.   11th year, Autumn, 8th month, 8th day. The Emperor
          died in the Chief Bedchamber.
            Winter, loth month, 5th day. He was buried in the misa-
          sagi at the foot of the Hanifu acclivity.
                             BOOK XVI.
                                                                1
            THE EMPEROR WOHATSUSE \VAKA-SAZAKI.


                      (1IfURETSU 2 TENNO.)

THE Emperor W ohatsuse waka-sazaki was the eldest son of
the Emperor Ohoke. His mother was called the Empress
Kasuga no Iratsume. He was made Prince Imperial in the
seventh year of the Emperor Ohoke. When he grew to man-
hood, he was fond of criminal law, and was well versed in the
statutes. He would remain in Court until the sun went down,
so that hidden wrong was surely penetrated. In deciding
cases he attained to the facts. 8 But he worked much evil, and
accomplished no good thing. He never omitted to witness in
person cruel punishments of all kinds, and the people of the
whole land were all in terror of him.
   In the 11th year, the 8th month of his reign, the Emperor
Ohoke died. The Minister of State Heguri no Matori no Omi
usurped the government of the country and tried to reign over
Japan. Pretending that it \vas for the Emperor's eldest son, he
built a palace, and ultimately dwelt in it himself. On all occa-
sions he was arrogant, and was utterly devoid of loyal principle.
Now the eldest son wished to betroth to himself Kagehime, the
daughter of Mononobe no Arakahi no Ohomuraji, and sent a
middleman to Kagehime's house to arrange for their union.
But Kagehime had already formed an illicit connection with XVI. 2.
Shibi, son of Matori, the 1vrinister of State. Fearing, however,
to offer opposition to the eldest son's proposal, she ans\vered

  1  W 0, little; hatsuse, name of place; \vaka-sazaki, young-wren.
  !  Muretsu, lnartial ardour.
  3 This description from "When" do\vn to "facts ~, is taken {roln the history

of the Chinese Emperor l\'Iingti of the Later Han Dynasty.
          400                              NIl-lONGl.

          him, saying :-" Thy handmaiden wishes to wait upon thee on
          the street of Tsubaki-ichi." Accordingly the eldest son, in
          order to go to the place of assignation, sent one of his personal
          attendants to the house of the Oho-on1i Heguri to ask for
          official horses, saying that he did so by his command. The
          Oho-omi mocked him, pretending that he would send them,
          and said :-" For whom (else) are official horses kept? Of
          course his orders shall be obeyed." But for a long time he
          did not send them. The eldest son cherished resentment at
          this, but controlled himself, and did not let it appear on his
          countenance. Ultimately he went to the place of assignation,
          and taking a place among the song-makers,l took hold of Kage-
          hime's sleeve, and was loitering about unconcernedly, when
          suddenly Shibi no Omi came, and pushing away the eldest son
          from Kagehime, got bet\veen them. Hereupon the eldest son
          let go Kagehime's sleeve, and turning round, confronted Shibi
          no Omi, and addressing him straight in the face, made a song,
          sayIng : -
                                   Of the briny current,2
XVI. 3.                            The breakers as I view,
                                   By the fin of the Tunny
                                   That COUles sporting
                                   I see my spouse standing.

                [One book has H harbour" instead of "briny current."]
            Shibi no Omi answered with a song, saying : -
                            Dost thou tell me, 0 Prince! to yield to thee
                            The eight-fold bamboo fence 3
                            Of the Olni's child?

             1 In Japanese uta-gaki, i.e. poetry-hedge.     The utagaki seenlS to have
          been a sort of poetical tournanlent. The" Kojiki" (Ch. K., p. 330) gives a
          different and not very intelligible account of this \var of verses. That ","ork
          places it at the beginning of an earlier reign, and makes the En\peror Woke
          the hero. The \vhole story is no doubt the \\'ork of some romancist. It
          \vould be a mere waste oftilne to try to sift out what grains of truth it may
          contain. It indicates, however, very different and much more unrestricted
          social relations between the sexes than that which prevailed in China and
          other Eastern countries. Of this there is abundant other evidence.
             2 Shibi nleans tunny-fish.   This suggests the introduction of the" briny
          current" of the first line.
             a The fence in this and the follo\ving verses is the enclosure of th.e bridal
          chamber. See above, pp. 13, 54.
                                MURETSU.                                401

  The eldest son made a song, saying : -

                      My great s\vord
                      Hung at lny girdle I will stand;
                      Though I may not dra\\' it,
                      Yet in the last resort
                      I am resolved to be united to her.

  Shibi no Omi answered with a song, saying : -

                      The great Lord's
                      Eig'ht-fold retiring-fence
                      He lnay try to build,
                      Still for \\'ant of strict care, I
                      The retiring-fence is not built.

  The eldest son made a song, saying : -

                      The eight-fold fastening fence
                      Of the Olui's child
                      Should an earthquake come, shaking,
                      Reverberating below,
                      "fwill be a ruined fastening fence.

       [A various version of the first line is "eight-fold Kara
    fence."]
  The eldest son gave Kagehime a song, saying:-

                 If Kagehime, who comes and stays
                 At the head of the lute, 2
                 Were a jewel,
                 She ""ould be a white sea-ear 3 pearl-
                 The pearl that I love.

  Shibi no Omi answered on behalf of Kagehime, and made a
song, sayIng:-
                        The great Lord's
                        Girdle of Japanese loom                                 XVI. 4.


   1 " For want of strict care" is in the original Ama-shinli. This word con-
taJns an allusion to the Onli's name Shibi. Mi and hi are often interchanged
in Japanese.
   , i.e. on nlY rigoht "hand.
  °a The sea-ear is in Japanese ahabi, which may be intended to suggest
ahazu, "not to become united to."
          402                               NIHONGI.

                             Hangs down in a bow. l
                             Whosoever it may be-
                             There is no one (but me) whose love she requites.

             The eldest son tilen for the first time saw that Shibi had
          already possessed Kagehime, and became conscious of all the
          disrespect shown him by the father and the son. He blazed
          out into a great rage, and forthwith, on that same night, pro-
          ceeded to the house of Ohotomo no Kanamura no Muraji,
          where he levied troops and concerted his plans. Ohotomo no
          Muraji waylaid Shibi no Omi with a force of several thousand
          men. He slew him at Mount Nara.
                 One book says :-" Shibi was spending the night in
               Kagehime's house, and that same night he was slain."
            At this time Kagehime followed on to the place where he
          had been slain, and seeing that he had already been put to
          death, was shocked, so that she did not know what she was
          doing, and tears of sorrow filled her eyes. At length she made
          a song, saying:-
                                 Passing Furu
                                 In Iso no Kami,
                                 Passing Takahashi
                                 In KOlllo-makura,
                                 Passing Oho-yake
                                 Where things are in plenty
                                 Passing Kasuga
                                 Of the spring..day,
                                 Passing W osaho
XVI. 5.                          The spouse-retiring,
                                 I n a precious casket,
                                 Placing boiled rice,
                                 In a precious vase,
                                 Placing water also,
                                 She lets fall tears as she goes.
                                 Alas ! for Kagehime.!

             J The sole reason \\?hy the second and third lines are introduced is to

          bring in tare, "to hang down." The same word is repeated in the fourth line
          with the meaning "who," thus producing a \,·ord-play, of \vhich Japanese
          poets are fond•
           • 2 This poem contains a succession of plays on words, some of \vhich are

          very obscure, and all are lost in an English version. Komo-makura means
          a Dlatting pillow, i.e. a roll of matting used as a pillow. Makura is frequently
          follo\\1ed by takaku, hiRh, in the phrase makura takaku suru, "to make high
                               lVluRETsu.                             4°3
   Hereupon Kagehime, when the funeral \vas over, and she
,vas about to return home, said, \vith an utterance choked by
grief :-" Alas! to-day I have lost my beloved husband." So
she burst into tears of sorro\\r, and in a state of distraction
made a song, saying:-

                 Like a deer
                 That, drenched ,vith water, hides
                 In the valley of N ara,-
                 (Of fertile soil)-
                 Is the young lord of Shibi-
                 (The ,vater-besprinkled 1) : -
                 Make him not thy prey. Oh! thou wild boar!

   Winter, 11th month, 11th day. Ohotomo no Kanamura no
Muraji spake to the eldest son, saying :-" The rebel Matori
ought to be slain. I pray thee let me attack him." The
eldest son said :-" We are about to have civil war in the
Empire, and without a rare warrior, we shall be unable to
accomplish anything. When I consider this well, I find that
thou art the man." 2 So he laid his plans in concert with him. XVI. 6.
   Hereupon Ohotomo no Ohomuraji,8 in personal command of
the troops, led them to besiege the house of the Oho-ami, and
setting fire to it, burnt it. His style of command was like the
scattering of clouds.
   Matori no Oho-omi, resenting the failure of his enterprise,
and feeling that his life was doomed, that his designs had
reached a limit, and that his hopes had vanished, cursed the
salt (sea) far and wide, and at length was put to death along
with his people. When he uttered the curse, the only place
which he forgot was the sea-brine of Tsunoga, and this he did

one's pillow." This is probably ,vhy makura is here associated ''lith Taka-
hashi. Dho-yake means great storehouse. Hence the epithet attached to
it. "Of the spring-day" is a regular Inakura-kotoba or pillow-word of
Kasuga, because kasuga is like kasumeru, to be hazy, and the \veather is
hazy in spring. Wosaho contains \VO, male, ,vhich accounts for the epithet
" spouse-retiring ,: in the next line. The commentators have Inuch more to
say about these verses. The luetre is irreg-ular.
   1 'fhis line has reference to the meaning of Shibi, viz. tunny-fish.

   t This speech is adapted from a Chinese author.

   S He "'as not Ohomuraji till after\vards.  See belo\v.
        J26                             NIHONGI.

           not curse. Therefore the Emperor eats salt from Tsunoga,
           and avoids eating the salt of other seas." 1
              12th month. Ohotomo no Kanamura no M.uraji having
           completely suppressed the insurrection, and restored the
           Government to the eldest son, asked permission to offer him
           the August Title, saying :-" Now there are no sons left of the
           Emperor Ohoke but Your Majesty, nor is there any second
           person to whom the people can give allegiance. Moreover,
           relying on the support of Supreme Heaven,' thou hast cleared
           away the wicked bands. By thy wise counsels and thy manly
           determination thou hast made the Celestial authority and the
           Celestial revenues to flourish. Japan must have a ruler, and
           who is there but thee to rule over Japan? I humbly pray
 XVI. 7. Your Majesty reverently to respond to the Divine Spirit of
           Earth by giving development to the luminous commands,
           casting a lustre on Japan, and widely taking over charge of
           the silver region." 3
              Hereupon the eldest son commanded the functionaries to
           prepare a sacred terrace at Namiki 4 in Hatsuse, where he
           ascended to the Imperial Dignity, and at length established
           his capital. On this day, Ohotomo no Kanamura no Muraji
           was made Ohomuraji.
A.D. 499-     1st year, Spring, 3rd month, 2nd day. Kasuga no Iratsume
           was appointed Empress. [It is not clear who her father was.]
             This year was the year Tsuchinoto U (16th) of the Cycle.
A.D. 500 .    2nd year, Autumn, 9th month. The Emperor ripped up
           the belly of a pregnant woman and inspected the pregnant
           womb. D
A.D. 50I~    3rd year, Winter, loth month. He plucked out men's nails.
           and made them dig up yams. 6
              11th month. He commanded Ohotomo no Muruya 7 no


           1 Compare above, p. 337, where the "Yater of a ,veIl ,vas cursed.
           :.: Motoori objects to this phrase as Chinese.                 Viz. Corea.
           .. Namiki means a ro'v of trees, an avenue lined \vith trees.
           5 This is a charge made against Show, King of Shang, in the "Shoo-
        king." See Legge's "Chinese Classics," \'01. III. p. 285.
           6 Dioscorea JapoI\ica.

           7 There is something wrong here. Ohotomo no Muruya \vas Prime
        Minister (see p.322) in the 7th year of Ingio Tenno ~A.D. 418). Muruya
        is no doubt a slip for Kanamura.
                                MURETSU.                                    J26

Ohomuraji to make a levy of labourers of the province of
Shinano, in order to build a castle in the village of Minomata.
It was called Kinouhe.
   In this month, Wi-ta-nang 1 of Pekche died and was buried
on the top of the hill of Takada.
   4th year, Summer, 4th month. He pulled out the hair of ~~i.5~~.
men's heads, made them climb to the tops of trees, and then
cut down the trees, so that the men who had climbed were
killed by the fall. This he took a delight in.
   In this year, I{ing Malta 2 of Pekche, for his lawless oppres-
sion of his subjects, was at length deposed by the people of
that country and King Shima raised to the throne. He was
made King Munyong.
         The Pekche "Shinsen" says :_CC King Malta lawlessly
      oppressed the subjects, and the people united to remove
     him. Munyong was set up. His sobriquet was I{ing
      Shima. He was the son of Prince Konchi, and therefore the
     elder brother of King Malta by a different mother. When
      Konchi went to Wa, he arrived at an island in Tsukushi
      where King Shima was born to him. He was sent back
      from the island, and did not reach the capital (of Japan).
      Owing to his having been born on an island, he received
      the name of Shima. There is now in the sea of Kawara :i
      an island called Nirim Shima 4 which is the King's birth-
      place. Therefore the Pekche people call this island Nirim
      Shima. Considering that King Shima was King Kero's
      son, and King Malta King Konchi's son, the expression
      , elder brother by a different mother' is not clear." [)

    1 This is the Corean pronunciation of the characters given, but very

likely these are not the proper characters for his name, and are only a
phonetic Japanese rendering of the sound. The traditional Kana rendering
is Otara.
   :2 Or Mata if the Japanese pronunciation is taken. I-lis real nalne \vas Mute.

    3 The traditional Kana pronunciation.

    4 The traditional Kana has serna, for the Corean syam, island.         Nirim
luean,; Lord.
    D The "Tongkam" (Vol. V. 4) account of these events is as follows:-

"Autulnn, 8th month (A.D. 501). Pekche built the Castle of Karim (in
Chollado), which was occupied by a garrison under a luilitary officer named
Chak Ka.
    Winter, 11th month. Chak Ka of Pekche slew his Lord Mute. Before
              4 06                           NIfIONGI.

A.D.   503.   5th year, Summer, 6th month. The Emperor made men
           lie down on their faces in the sluice of a dam and caused them
           to be \vashed away: with a three-bladed lance he stabbed
           them. In this he took delight.
A.D. 50~.     6th year, Autumn, 9th month, 1st day'. The Emperor made
           a decree, saying :-" As a measure for transmitting a kingdom,
           a son is raised up to honour. l But \ve have no successor:
 XVI. 9· wherewithal shall we hand down our name to posterity?
           In accordance, therefore, with old Imperial precedents, we
           establish the Wohatsuse Toneri and make them assume the
           designation of· this reign, so that it may not be forgotten
           for ten thousand years."
              Winter, loth month. The Land of Pekche sent Lord Mana
           with tribute. The Emperor, con5idering that for many years
           Pekche had not sent tribute, detained him, and would not let
           hirn go.
A.D. 50 S.    7th year, Spring, 2nd Dlonth. He made men climb up trees
           and then shot them down with a bow, upon which he laughed.
              Summer, 4th month. The King of Pekche sent Lord Shika
           with tribute, and a separate memorial, saying :-" Mana, the
           previous tribute-messenger, was no relation of the Sovereigns
           of pekche. Therefore I humbly send Shika to wait upon the
           Court." He eventually had a son named Lord Pop-sa. He
           was the ancestor of the Kimi of Yamato.
A.D. 506 .    8th year, Spring, 3rd month. Nudas feminas super latas

              this when the King appointed Chak Ka cOlnmandant of the garrison of
              Karim, he did not wish to go, and declined on the score of ill-health. The
              King would not listen to his eXCU5ie, and he therefore hated the King.
              Upon this the King ,vent a-hunting on the plain east of Sachha. Again he
              hunted in the plain north of Ung-chhan. Again he hunted in the plain west
              of Saebha. Being prevented from returning by a great fall of snow, he
              stayed for the night at the viUage of Mapho, where Chak Ka sent a man to
              assassinate him. A month later he ,vas buried and received the name of
              Tong-syang. His son Shill1a, other,vise called Yoryung, came to the
              throne.
                 Spring, 1st month (A.D. 502). Chak Ka of Pekche ,vas executed. He
              had taken position in the castle of Karim and rebelled. 'fhe King proceeded
              with an arlny to the city of Utu and ordered an attack upon hhn. Chak Ka
              came out and surrendered. He was put to death and his body flung into
              the River Pek-Kang."
                1 Is made Prince IOlperial.
                         MURETSU.                         40 7
tabulas imposuit et, equis adhibitis, fecit ut coirent cum eis.
Tum, examinatione habita, quarum pudenda madida erant, eas
interfecit, quarum autem madida non erant, eas fecit servas
publicas. These things he took a pleasure in.
   At this time he dug a pond and made a park which he filled XVI. 10.
with birds and beasts. Here he was fond of hunting, and of
racing dogs and trying horses. He went out and in at all
times, taking no care to avoid storms and torrents of rain.
Being warmly clad himself, he forgot that the people were
starving from cold; eating dainty food, he forgot that the Em-
pire was famishing. He gave great encouragement to dwarfs and
performers, making them execute riotous music. He prepared
strange diversions, and gave licence to lewd voices. Night
and day he constantly indulged to excess in sake in the
company of the women of the Palace. His cushions were of
brocade, and many of his garments were of damask and fine
\vhite silk.
   'Vinter, 12th month, 8th day. The Emperor died in the
Palace of Namiki.




                                                     B
This page intentionally left blank
        CONTENTS OF PART TWO


Book                         Accession A. D .   Page
 XVII.    Keidai Tenno           ~07               I

 XVIII.   Ankan Tenno            534             26
          Senkwa Tenno           53 6            33
   XIX.   Kimmei Tenno           ~4°             36
   XX.    Bidatsu Tenno          57 2            90
   XXI.    Yomei Tenno           5 86           106
          SUjun Tenno            5'88           I I 2

  XXII.   Suiko Tenno            5'93           121
 XXIII.   Jomei Tenno            62 9           IS7
 XXIV.    KOByoku Tenno          64 2           17 1
 XXV.      Kotoku Tenno          645            195
 XXVI.    Sairnei Tenno          65S            24 8
XXVII.     Tenchi Tenno          662            274-
XXVIII.    Temrnu Tenno Part I   673            3°1
 XXIX.     Temmu Tenno Part 2    673            3 21
 XXX.     Jito Tenno             68 7           3 82



Errata et Addenda                               425
Index                                           433
This page intentionally left blank
                 NIHONGI.
                      BOOK XVII.

                  THE EMPEROR WOHODO.


                   (I(EIDAI l TENNO.)

THE EmperorWohodo        [otherwise called Hiko-futo no Mikoto]
was the son of Prince Hiko ·nushi-bito, a descendant in the
fifth generation of the Emperor Homuda. His mother's name
was Furuhime. She was a descendant in the seventh genera-
tion of the Emperor Ikume. The Emperor's father, hearing
at his country-house at Miwo, in the district of Takashima, in
the province of Ohomi, of the extreme and resplendent beauty
of Furuhime's countenance, sent a messenger to Sakanawi in
 Mikuni to ask for her in marriage. He took her to him as his
consort, and she eventually gave birth to the Emperor.
    The Prince, the Emperor's father, died while the Emperor
was yet a child. Furuhime thereupon made lament, saying : -
" I am now far removed from my native place: how could I
bring him up (here)? I will return to my parents at Takamuku XVII. 2.
 [Takamuku is a village in Echizen], and there respectfully
 bring up the Emperor."
    When the Emperor attained to manhood, he loved the
 people, and was courteous to nlen of worth. He was of a
 generous disposition.
    The Emperor Wohatsuse died in the 8th year of his reign, in
 Winter, the 12th month, 8th day, at the age of fifty-seven.
 He had never had any children, either sons or daughters, and
 there was no one to succeed him.
                        1   Succeed-body.
        2                                 J.
                                               '
                                          N THONGI.
            On the 21st day, the Ohomuraji, Ohotomo no !{anamura,
         counselled, saying :-" At this moment there is no successor
         whatever to the throne. 1 \Vhere shall the Empire bestow its
         allegiance? Froin ancient times even until now this has been
         a cause of disaster. No'v there is in the district of Kuhada, in
         the province of Tamba, Prince Yamato-hiko, a descendant in
         the fifth generation of the Emperor Tarashi-nakatsu-hiko.
         I_et us make the experiment of preparing an 'armed force to
         surround his carriage as a guard, and sending to meet him,
         establish him as our sovereign." The Oho-omi and Ohomuraji
         all assented, and sent to meet him in the manner proposed.
         Upen this, Prince Yamato-hiko, viewing from a distance the
         troops which \vere sent to meet him, was alarmed and changed
         countenance. Accordingly he took refuge in a mountain-valley,
         and no one could learn whither he had gone.
A.D. 507    1st year, Spring, 1st month, 4th day. The Ohomuraji,
         Ohotomo no Kanamura, again counselled, saying :-" Prince
         W ohodo is of an affectionate and dutiful disposition. He is a
XVII. 3. fit person to take over the Celestial succession. Let us, there-
         fore, courteously offer it to him, and thus continue the
         prosperity of the Imperial institution." Mononobe no Arakahi
         no Ohomuraji, with Kose no W obito no Oho-omi and others,
         all said :-" On a careful review of the branch descendants,
         there is no other worthy person but Prince W ohodo."
             6th day. Omi and Muraji were sent to Mikuni with
         emblems of rank, and provided with a palanquin of state to
         fetch him. The troops to form his guard arrived suddenly in
XVII. 4. awe-inspiring array, clearing the way before him. Upon this,
          the Emperor Wohodo remained calm and self-possessed,2
          seated on a chair, with his retainers in order by him, just as if
          he already occupied the Imperial throne. The envoys, there-
          fore, bearing the emblems of rank, with respect and reverence
          bowed their hearts, and committed to him the Imperial
          authority, asking pern1ission to devote to him their lo)ral
          service. In the Emperor's mind, however, doubts still
            1 It seenlS clear, from the fact that on this and a previous similar occasion
         adoption was not resorted to, that this practice had not yet been introduced
         from China.
            ~ Unlike the other prince, \vho ran a\vay \vhen he sa\v the troops
         approach.
                              KEIDAI.                                 5
remained, and for a good while he did not consent. Just then
he chanced to learn that Arako, I<.ahachi no Mumakahi no
Obito had sent a messenger secretly to inform him minutely of
the real intentions of the Oho-ami and Ohomuraji in sending
to escort him. After a delay of two days and three nights, he
at length set out. Then he exclaimed, admiringly :-" Well
done, Mumakahi no Obito! Had it not been for the informa-
tion given by thy messenger, I ran a great risk of being made a
laughing-stock to the Empire. The proverbial saying, ' Be not
a respecter of rank, but value the heart,' was doubtless meant
for men like Arako." When he came to the throne, he treated
Arako with special favour.
   12th day. The Emperor arrived at the Palace of Kusuba.
   2nd month, 4th day. The Ohomuraji, Ohotomo no Kana-
mui-a, went on his knees, and, with repeated obeisances, pre-
 sented the Mirror, the Sword, and the Imperial Signet. The XVII. 5.
 Emperor Wohodo declined them, saying :-" It is no light
 matter to be a father to the people and to rule the State. I,
 the unworthy one, am deficient in ability, and do not deserve
 to be thought fit for it. I pray thee, alter thy purpose, and
 select some wise person, for I, the unworthy one, do not dare to
 accept." Ohotomo no Ohomuraji, bowing down to the ground,
 persisted in his request. Then the Emperor W ohodo, facing
 the west, declined three times, and facing the south,l declined
 twice. Ohotomo no Ohomuraji and the rest all said :-" In the
 humble judgment of thy servants, the Great Prince is excel-
 lently fitted to be a father to the people and to rule the State.
 On behalf of the ancestral temples and the temples of the
 Earth and of Grain, thy servants' judgment dares not be hasty.
 Availing ourselves of the general desire, we pray that thou wilt
 graciously be pleased to grant thy acceptance." The Emperor
 W ohado said :-" Ye Oho-omi and Ohomuraji, and all ye high
 officials 1 Since you all urge me, the unworthy one, I, the
 unworthy one, do not presume to oppose you." So he accepted
 the Imperial Signet. 2
    On this day he assumed the Imperial dignity. Ohotomo,
  1  The Imperial position.
  2  Was this Signet the Signet given the Japanese Emperor by China
(" Early Japanese History," p. 70)? Or is it nlerelya Chinese expression
for the gem :Ii, \vhich was one of the three regalia?
        4                                   NIHONGI.

         Kanamura no Ohomuraji was appointed Ohomuraji, Kose no
         Wobito no Oho-omi was made Oho-omi, and Mononobe no
         Arakahi no Ohomuraji was made Ohomuraji, all being con-
         firmed in their previous offices. Thereupon the Oho-omi and
         Ohomuraji each entered on their respective offices and ranks.
             loth day. Ohotomo no Ohomuraji petitioned the Emperor,
         saying :-" Thy servant has been informed that it was a prin-
         ciple of government with former sovereigns that without the
         confirmation of an heir to the throne, it is impossible to give
         security to heaven and earth. \Vithout the intimacy of the
XVII. 6. side-courts, it is impossihle to continue the calices! For this
          reason, tIle Emperor Shiraga, having no heir, sent thy servant's
          grandfather, Ohomuraji Muruya, to all the provinces to esta-
          blish three kinds of Shiraga Be [These three kinds were, first,
          Shiraga Be no Toneri; second, Shiraga Be no Kashihade;
          third, Shiraga Be no Yugehi~ , by which his name might remain
          to after ages. Alas! was not this painful? I pray thee,
          therefore, to establish the Imperial Princess Tashiraka 2 and
          take her to thee as Empress. Then send the officials charged
          with the worship of the Gods of fIeaven and Earth to make
          reverent sacrifice to them, and ask of them an Imperial scion,
          \vho shall fully respond to the hopes of thy people." The
           Emperor said :-" Be it so."
              3 rd month, 1st day. The Emperor made a decree, saying:
           _'I The Gods of Heaven and Earth must not want a master of
           their worship; the universe must not fail of a Lord. Heaven
           produces the nation, and establishes it by means of a
           supreme ruler, whom it causes to superintend its supply of
           food, so that each man's life may be preserved. The
           Ohomuraji, grieving for Our childlessness, has displayed his
           loyalty towards the State, showing generation after generation
           a devoted fidelity. Is this simply for the sake of Our own
            reIgn?
               Let the Imperial Princess Tashiraka be brought to meet me
           with all due ceremony/'
               5th day. The Imperial Princess Tashiraka was made
            Empress, and took the government of the interior (of the
              1   The calyx is that which supports the fio\ver.   Hence it is put for an heir
            to the throne.
               ~ Daughter of the Emperor Ninken.
                                 KEIDAJ.                        5
Palace). She eventually gave birth to a son, who became
Ame-kuni-oshi.harani I-hiro-niha no Mikoto.: He" was the
rightful heir, but as he was young in years, he held the Empire
after his two elder brothers [The two elder brothers were Hiro-
kuni-oshi-take-kanahi no Mikoto and Take-o-hiro-kuni-oshi- XVII. 1.
tate no Mikoto. See below.] had ruled it.
   9th day. The Emperor made a decree, saying :-" We have
heard that if men are of fit age and do not cultivate, the
Empire may suffer famine; if women are of fit age and do not
spin, the Empire may suffer cold. Therefore is it that the
sovereigns cultivate \vith their own hands, so as to give
encouragement to agriculture, while their consorts rear silk-
worms themselves, so as to encourage the mulberry season.
How, then, shall there be prosperity if all, from the function-
aries down to the ten thousand families, neglect agriculture and
spinning? Let the officials publish this to all the Empire, so
that our sentiments may be made known."
    14th day. The Emperor took to him eight concubines.
         Some of the eight concubines whom h~ took to him
      were earlier, others later. When it is said that they were
      taken on this day (the 14th), it is meant that then for the
      first titne they were lodged in the after palace, a lucky day
      having been selected by divination, in consequence of the
      accession to the Imperial Dignity. Thus the facts are
      glossed over. Other cases are to be understood silnilarly.
   The senior concubine's naIne was Menoko [otherwise called
 IroheJ, daughter of Kusaka, Wohari no Muraji. She gave
 birth to two children, both of whom possessed the Enlpire.
 The first was called the Imperial Prince Magari no Ohine,~
 who became Oshi-kuni-oshi-take-kanahi no Mikoto. 4 The
 second was called the Imperial Prince Hinokuma Takada, \vho
 became Take-\vo-hiro-kuni-oshi-tate no Mikoto.& The next
 concubine was Wakugohime, younger sister of Miho no Tsuno-
 wori no Kimi. She gave birtll to the Imperial Prince Oho-
 iratsuko and the Imperial Princess Idzumo. The next was called XVII. 8.
 Hirohime, the daughter of Prince Ohomata of Sakata. She
 gave birth to three daughters, the eldest of whom was called

  1  The" Kojiki " has haruki.   Another rendering is hirakl.
  2  The Emperor Kin1mei.                    • Or Ohoye.
  .. Ankan Tenno.                            il Senkwa Tenno•
        6                              NIHONGI.

          the Imperial Princess Kanzaki, the middle one the Imperial
          Princess 1t1amuta, and the youngest the Imperial Princess
          Mumal{uta. The next was called Womi no Iratsume, daughter
          of Prince Mate of Okinaga. She was the mother of the
          Imperial Princess Sasage, who was in attendance on the shrine
          of the Great Deity of Ise. The next was Sekihime, daughter
          [some say younger sister] of Womochi, Mamuta no Muraji.
          She had three daughters, the eldest called the Imperial Princess
          Mamuta no Oho-iratsume, the middle aIle the Imperial Princess
          Shirazaka no Ikuhihime, and the youngest the Imperial
          Princess Wono no iratsume [otherwise called Nagashihime J.
          The next was Yamatohime, daughter of Katahi, Miwo no
          Kimi. She bore two sons and two daughters. The first was
          named the Imperial Princess Oho-iratsume,t and the second
          the Imperial Prince Ivlariko. He was the ancestor of the
          Kimi of Mikuni. The third was called the Imperial Prince
          Mimi, and the fourth the Imperial Princess Akahime The
          next ,vas Hayehime, daughter of Kahachi, Wani no Omi. She
          bore one son and two daughters. The first was called the
XVII. 9. Imperial Princess Wakayahime, the second the Imperia.l
          Princess Tsubura no Iratsume, and the third the Imperial
          Prince Atsu. The next was Hirohime, daughter of Prince
          Ne. She had two sons, the elder of whom was called the
          Imperial Prince Usagi. He was the ancestor of the Kimi of
          the Sake-makers. The younger was called the Imperial Prince
          Naka. He ,vas the ancestor of the Kinli of Sakada. 2
             This year was the year Hinoto I (24th) of the Cycle.
A.D. 508.    2nd year, vVinter, loth month, 3rd day. The Emperor
          W ohatsuse waka-sazaki was buried in the misasagi on the hill
          of Ihatsuki at Katawoka.
             12th month. The people of Tamna 3 in the midst of the
            1Some give iratsuko for the Kana of this and similar names.
            2The" Kojiki" and "Kiujiki" present some trifling variations in the
        accounts of these concubines and children.
          3 Tamna is the island no\v called Ch~chu by the Careans and known to
        us as Quelpaert. The statement here made is utterly improbable in itself,
        as Quelpaert is in sight of the Corean mainland. I t is contradicted by the
        following passages of the" Tongkam."
           "King Munchiu of Pekche, 2nd year (A.D. 476), Sumlner, 4th month.
        The land of Tamna presented tribute of their national productions to
        pekche. The king ,,'as rejoiced, and appointed the ambassadors Eunsol
                                 KEIDAI.                                      7
Southern Sea first had communication ,vith the Land of
pekche.
   3rd year, Spring, 2nd month.           Envoys were sent to A.D. 509.
Pekche.
       The statement in the Pekche "Original Record" that
     Lord Kuramachi came from Japan (Nippon) is unclear.
   The subjects of Pekche, who during three or four generations
had made their escape and were living as refugees in the X\"II.
villages of the Japanese domain of Imna, having lost their place
in the register of population, \\rere all removed to Pekche and
replaced on the registers.
   5th year, Winter, loth month. The capital was transferred A.D. 511.
to Tsutsuki in Yamashiro.
   6th year, Summer, 4th month, 6th day. Oshiyama, Hod- A.D. 512.
zumi no Omi, was sent on a mission to Pekche \vith a present
of 44 horses of the Land of Tsukushi.
   Winter, 12th month. Pekche sent an envoy with tribute.
In a separate memorial Pekche asked for four districts of the
Land of Imna, viz. Upper Tari, Lower Tari, Syata, and Muro.
Oshiyama, Hodzumi no Omi, Governor of the Land of Tari,
made a representation to the Emperor, saying :-" These four
districts border on Pekche and are far separated from the
Japanese Residency. Morning and evening they (i.e. Pekche
and Tari) exchange communications: their fowls and dogs
cannot be kept apart. If they are now ceded to Pekche and
Tamna is in the midst of the Southern Sea. In ancient times there \vere
no inhabitants. Then there \vere three divine men who bubbled up froln
the earth. The eldest was called Nang-eul.la, the next ,vas called Ko-eul-la,
and the third Pu-eul-la. One day these three, having gone out to hunt by
the sea-side, found a stone coffer. On opening it, they discovered three
women, with cattle of various sorts and seeds of the five kinds of grain.
They eventually shared between them, taking the WOlnen as wives. Then
each betook himself to a \\'ell-\vatered fertile spot and selected by divination
a residence. Nang-eul-Ia's d\\'eUing was called First City, Ko.eul..la's
Second City, and Pu-eul-la's lhird City Then they sO\\'ed the five grains
and pastured the cattle, and prospered and Inultiplied from day to day.
Tamna is also called Taln-mu-ra."-" Tongkaln,'~ IV. 3 I.
  " A.D. 498. The King of Pekche, because Tamna did not pay tribute, set
out himself on an expedition against it. He got as far as Muchinchiu, when
the Tamna people heard of it and sent Inessengers to beg for pardon. So
they were let off."-" Tongkaul," V. 3.
  There is no mention of Tamna in the " Tongkam" under the year 508.
         8                             NIHONGI.

           united to it so as to form one country, no better measure of
           conservation can be adopted. It is true, no doubt, that even if
           ceded and united to Pekch6 there will still be a danger for
           future generations. Much more how n1any years could they
           be defended if they became foreign territory? " 1
              Kanamura, Ohotomo no Ohomuraji, having thoroughly com-
           prehended this report, adopted this policy and laid it before
           the Emperor. Accordingly Arakahi, Mononobe no Ohomu-
           raji, was appointed Imperial envoy. Mononobe no Ohomuraji
           was on the point of leaving for the official inn at ~~aniha in
           order to nlake known the Emperor's commands to the Pekch6
           guests, when his wife expostulated with him, saying:-
           " Originally the Deities 2 of Sumiyoshi bestowed on the Em-
           peror Homuda while in the womb the gold and silver lands
           beyond the sea, namely Karyn, Pekche, Silla, and Imna.
           Therefore did the Great Empress 3 Okinaga-tarashihime no
XVII. I I. Mikoto and the Oho-omi Takechi no Sukune first establish
           Government Houses 4 in each of these countries and constitute
           them our screen territory beyond the sea. So that this has
           not come to pass without reason. If now we were to divide
           off (a part) and grant it to others, we should be acting contrary
           to the interests of our own land. How, in that case, during
           the long ages should reproach be sundered from men's
           mouths?" The Ohomuraji answered and said :-" Thy advice
           is reasonable, but I fear to disobey the Celestial command."
            His wife remonstrated with him earnestly, saying :--" Pretend
           that thou art ill, and do not make communication." The
            Ohomuraji was guided by this remonstrance, and therefore
           another envoy was appointed to make known the Imperial
           will. Presents were given, and an Imperial decree granting
            four districts of Imna in accordance with the petition. The
            Imperial Prince Ohine, owing to certain business, had not
           heard of the cession of territory. When it was too late he
           learnt that the decree had been issued. He was surprised and
           dissatisfied, and endeavoured to have it altered, saying:-

           1 The meaning is that Pekche \\7ill be better able to prevent these pro-
         vinces from falling into· the hands of Silla than Japan. All Imna ,vas
         conquered by Silla in A.D. 562. See below, XIX. 51.
           ~ See above, \Tol. I. pp. 233-235, and" Satow's Handbook," p. 192.
           a The word used does not mean a reigning E,mpress.          4 Miyake.
                                KEIDAI.                                    9
'" Since the days of the Emperor in the wOlnb) there has been
established the land of our Government House. Shall we
lightly yield to the request of a frontier land and grant it away
without difficulty?" Accordingly he sent Hiwashi: no Kishi
to make a fresh intimation to the Pekche guests. The Envoys,
 ho\vever, replied, saying :-" The Emperor, the father, has
 already', for considerations of expediency, consummated a grant
 by Imperial decree. How can the Imperial Prince, his son, act
 contrary to the Emperor's expressed will, and unauthorizedly
 make to us a different intimation? Surely he cannot be in
 earnest. But granting that it were true, which is the more
 painful-to be beaten with the large end of a staff or with the
 small one?" At length they took their departure. Upon this
 it was rumoured that Ohotomo no Ohomuraji and Oshi~yama,
  Hodzumi no Omi, Governor of the Land of Tari, had received
  bribes from pekche.
    7th year, Summer, 6th month. Pekch6 sent General Chya- A D. 5 13.
  mi Mun-kwi and General Chyu-ri Cheung-nj along \vith Oshi-
 yama, Hodzumi no Omi [the Pekche " Original Record" says,
  "Commissioning Lord Oshiyama "], to bring as tribute a
 scholar of the five classics named Tan Yang-ni. They XVII. 12.
  separately addressed the Emperor, saying :-" The land of
  Pan-phi 8 has seized thy servants' territory of I-mun. 4 I hunlbly
  pray that the Celestial favour rnay decide that it be restored to
 its original jurisdiction."
    Autumn, 8th month, 26th day. S:yun-ta, the eldest son of
  the King of Pekche, died.£)
    9th month. The Imperial Prince Magari no Ohine in per-
  son 6 betrothed to himself the Imperial Princess Kasuga.
  Thereupon all through the moonlit night they held s\veet con-
       Ojin Tenno.
  2    This nall1e ll1eans sun-eagle. There is a god called 1"\lna no Hi\vashi
mentioned in the" Kogojiui."
   ;, The traditional Kana is Hahe. It is doubtful here \vhich rendering to
follo\v.
   4 It SeelTIS to haye been Japanese at this tilne.  The" Seishiroku" says
that in the reign of Mimaki-irihiko the Imna people asked Japan to annex
 I-n1un, as the inhabitants were in constant strife with Silla. I·mun \vas a
<listrict on the north-east frontier of Imna.
    :) The" Tongkam" says nothing of this.
    6 i.e. \vithout a middle-man.   She was Ninken's daughter.
            10                              NIHONGI.

            verse till the da\vn canle on them unawares. Of a sudden the.
            grace of elegant st)Tle was embodied in his speech, and he broke
            into song, saying:-

                                In the eight-island land 1
                                \.iainly a wife I sought
                                UntH in Kasuga
                                (Of Spring weather)
                                Hearing that there \vas
                                A fair maiden,
                                Hearing that there ,vas
                                A good Inaiden,
                                Pushing open
                                The spruce-fir plank door
                                (Of right-\vood 2 cleavage)
                                Hither have I come.
                                Taking it by the foot end
                                I laid hold of the henl 3 (of her garment),
                                'Taking it by the pillo\v-end
                                I laid hold of the hem (of her garment) ;
                                Then my beloved's 4 arm
                                \Vas ,vound around lne
                                And my arm too
                                \Vas wound round my beloved.
XVII. 13.                        Like a luxuriant vine,
                                Arnl embraced and t\vined with arnl ;
                                As the armlet fits the elbo\v, a
                                 In s\\'eet slunlher we lay.
                                'Tis the bird of the courtyard,
                                The cock that is cro\ving :
                                 'Tis the bird of the lnoor,
                                 The pheasant that is clamoming.
                                Ere I have uttered
                                All my nlind fully
                                 The da\vn has COine. Oh my beloved one ~

                 Then his consort replied in song, saying:-

              1   i.e. Japan. See above, Vol. I. p. 15.
              2   Maki, lit. "right-\vood," is here a mere honorific epithet applied to the
            \vood of the Chamrecyparis obtusa, which has an even grain, adapting it
            ,veIl (or making planks at a time when saws were unknown and the axe
             was used for that purpose.
               3 Tsuma, "hem," also means" spouse.:'

               .. Lit. younger sister, ,vhich was used much like our '~ my dear."
               I) The interpretation of this line is very doubtful.
                                 KEII)AI.                                   II

                     Do\rn the ri\'er of Hatstlse
                    (The secluded)
                    .t\. balnboo con1es floating--
                    Close-jointed, long-jointed; 1
                   1'he bottoln part
                    Making into a lute,
                   The upper part
                   Making into a flut~,
                   Blowing into it (the flute), playing on it (the lute),
                   \\7"ere I to ascend and stand
                   ()n the top of Milnoro,
                   And publish it ~ there,
                   The very fishes
                   'That pass under the ,,,ater
                   Of the pond of Ihare
                   (The creeper-clad) 3
                   Would come to the surface and lament:
                   The august girdle of sn1all pattern;'
                   Girded on                                                     XVII. 14-
                   13y our Great Lord
                   Who rules peacefully,
                   Hangs down in a knot-
                   Not a luan is there ,vhoever he Inay be
                   But \vould COlne up and lament.

  "Tinter, 11th month, 5th day.            General Chya-mi Mun-kwi
of Pekche, Mun-tok-chi of Silla, Sin-i-hye and Pun-pha-wi-sa
of Ara and Kwi-chon-hye and Chyung-mun-chi of Pan-phi were
sent for to attend Court in a body, and received communica-
tion of a gracious Imperial order, giving I-mun and Te-sa to
the Land of pekche.
   I n this nl0nth the Land of Pan-phi sent Cheup-chi ,vith

   1 Close-jointed at the bottonl, long-jointed at the top.  At least so one
commentator. There are other equally unsatisfactory explanations of this
line.
   2 Viz. the sadness of the coming of the da,vn under the circumstances

aboye described.
   3 Iha lueans "rock."   Therefore the epithet in parentheses.
   4 This and the next four lines are introduced solely because tare, "to

hang do,vn," also means "who." I have endeavoured to imitate this by
" knot" and " not." See above, Vol. I. p. 402.
   This poem amounts to this :-
   " If to the accompaniment of nlusic I ,vere to express the sadness of our
parting, the very fishes ,,,ould laluent, and all men ,vha heard me would
lament."
         12                         NIHONGI.

            presents of rare and valuable objects, asking- for the Land of
            I-mun. Eventually it was refused them.
               12th month, 8th day. An Imperial decree was made,
            saying :-" We, having taken over the Celestial succession,
            have been watchful to preserve the Ancestral Temples, and
            have been wary and fearful. For a while the Empire has been
            at peace; \vithin the seas there has been serenity and calm.
            Years of abundance have been frequent, redounding to the
            prosperity of the Land. Admirable! Maroko/ thou hast
            made known our sentiments to the eight quarters. l\fagnifi-
            cent! Magari no Ohine! thou hast cast a lustre on our
            authority amongst all countries. 1apan ~ is harmonious, and
            each man may do as he pleases in the Empire. Akitsu is
            glorified, and the Royal territory raised to high honour. Thou
            prizest nought but wisdom: in nothing dost thou take greater
            pleasure than in doing- good. Depending on this, the sagely
XVII. 15. influences undulate afar: leaning upon this, the profound
            virtue is permanently supported. Truly, such is thy virtue
            that thou art fit to occupy the Spring Palace, 3 to aid Us in
            dispensing benevolence, and to assist Us by supplementing our
            deficiencies."
 A.D. 51 4.    8th year, 1st month. The eldest Prince's Consort, the
            Imperial Princess Kasuga, Vlas late in coming out one morning,
            and was not in her ordinary state. The eldest Prince's sus-
            picions were aroused. He went into the Palace, and found
            his Consort lying on her couch weeping and sobbing. Her
            passion was such that she could not control it. The eldest
             Prince, thinking it strange, inquired of her, saying :-" What
            cause of grief hast thou, that thou sobbest and weepest this
            morning?" His Consort said :-" Thy handmaiden's sorrow
            hath no other cause but this. The heaven-soaring birds, in
            order lovingly to nurture their young, build nests on the tree-
            tops, so deep is their affection for them. The creeping things
            that crawl upon the ground, in order to guard their offspring,
             make holes in the ground, so careful is their guardianship of
            them. How then should mankind be wanting in foresight?
           1 Ankan Tenno.
             "Japan" is probably an anachronism. The whole speech has every
              2
         appearance of being an invention of later times.
           3 The Palace of the Heir to the Throne.
                                KElDA!.                                  13
The grief of childlessness having befallen the eldest Prince,
thy handmaiden's name also becomes extinct."          The Heir
Apparent sympathized with her in her sorrow, and informed the
Emperor, who made a decree, saying:-" Our son, Maroko! 1
thy Consort's words are in profound accordance with reason.
It is impossible that they should remain void, and without
a consolatory response. Let her be granted the granary 2
of Saho, to bear her name for ten t~10usand generations."
   3rd month. Panphi built castles at Cha-thun:l and Te-sa,
thus bringing itself in line with Manhye. They also estab-
lished beacon-towers, as a defensive measure against Japan. XVII. 16
 Moreover, they built castles at Ni-nyol-pi and Masupi, and so
connected \vith Ma-cho-hye and Chhyu-pu; they brought
 together troops and weapons, \vherewith they harassed Silla,
 making booty of women and children, and fleecing the villages.
 Their violence increasing, scarce any inhabitants remained.
 Their deeds of outrage, profligacy, injury, oppressIon, and
 murder were too numerous to set do\vn in detail.
    9 th year, Spring, 2nd month, 4th day. General Mun-kwi, A.D. 51 5.
 the Pekche envoy, and his party asked leave to go away. Byan
 Imperial decree Mononobe no Muraji [his personal name is not
 given] was attached to them, and they were allowed to go back.
         The Pekche " Original Record" says :-" Mononobe no
       chichi 4 no Muraji."
    In this month they came to the Island of Sa-to/» where they
 learned by report that men of Pan-phi, with hate in their
 bosoms and venonl in their mouths, were committing wanton
 outrage, trusting in brute force. Therefore Mononobe no
  Muraji, in command of a fleet of five hundred war-ships, made
 straight for the estuary of Te-sa, and General M un-kwi departed
  by Wa)l of Silla.
    Summer, 4th month. Mononobe no Muraji remained at
 anchor in the estuary of Te-sa.

   1 I should like to find some authority for omitting" our son " and trans-

lating maro-ko thus. See above, "01. I. p. 264, \vhere maro ga chi is
rendered" our father."
   2 Miyake.

        tF.
   :i .::;.                                B tF
                 See below, X\'II. 18, \vhere     (K\vithan) is probably this
place, one of the t\\'O being a mistake.
   4 i.e. H the father."                       5 Sand-island.

  VOL. II.                                                        c
         13                                NIIIONGI.

               6th day. The Pan-phi people raised an army and came to
            attack them. They stripped them of their clothing, plundered
            them of their property, and burnt all their tents! Mononobe
            no Muraji and his men were frightened, and took to flight,
XVII. 17. saving their lives with difficulty. They anchored at Mun-rno-ra
            [the name of an island] .
 A.D. 516.     loth year, Summer, 5th month. Pekche sent Mok-hiop, of
            the former division,2 and the Pu-ma:{ Kap-he to entertain Mono-
            nobe no Muraji and his men at I-mun, and to escort them into
            that country. All the (Pekche) officials brought forth clothing,
            axe-iron, and woven stuffs, assisting them by presents of their
            national products, which they piled up in the court. Kind
            visits of inquiry were made to them, and unusually abundant
            presents were bestowed on them.
               Autumn, 9th month. Pekche sent General Chyuri Cheuk-
            chha,4 along with Mononobe no Muraji, to come and give
            thanks for the grant of the territory of I-mun. They also
            offered tribute of a scholar acquainted with the five classics,
            named Ko An-mu, of Han/' and asked that he should be
            exchanged for Tan Yang-ni. 6 He was exchanged in accordance
            with this request.
               14th day. Pekche sent General Chyang-mak-ko and two
            Japanese, named Shinato and Ahita, to accompany Anchyong,
            the Koryo envoy, and his party, who came to our Court to
            cement amicable relations.
 A.D. 518.     12th year, Spring, 3rd month, 9th day. The capital ,vas
            removed to Otokuni.1
 A.D. 52 3.    17th year, Summer, 5th month. King Mu-nyong of Pekche
            died. 8

              1 Or rather screens of cloth to hide off an enCamp111ent.
              2 See below, XXVI I. 12.
             3 Puma is possibly the Inodern Corean Puma, i.e. King's son-in-la\\~, but it

          is perhaps nlore likely to be a luan's nalne too, thus luaking three Chyon-pu,
          or officials of the fortner division.
             4 Probably the person called Cheung ni above, XVII. I I, the difference

          being owing to a copyist's error.
             S The Chinese dynasty of that name.       It seems here to form part of the
          name.
             S See above, XVII. 12.                      i In Yamashiro.
             :i This agrees with the" Tongkam ,; date, even to the Inonth.
                                KEIDAI.                                  13
  18th year, Spring, 1st month.     The Pekche Heir Apparent, A.D. 52 4.
Myong/ assumed the (Royal) dignity.
   20th year, Autumn, 9th month, 13th day. The capital was A.D. 526
                                                                   XVII. 18
removed to Tamaho in Ihare. 2 [In one book it says 7th year.]
   21st year, Summer, 6th month, 3rd day. Afumi no !(ena no A.D. 527.
Omi, in command of an army of 60,000 men, was about to
proceed to Imna, in order to re-establish and unite to Imna
South Kara and Tok-sa-thiin, ,vhich had been conquered by
Silla, when Ihawi, Tsukushi no Kuni no Miyakko, secretly
plotted rebellion, so that there was a delay of several years.
 Fearing that the matter would be hard to accomplish, he was
constantly watching a favourable opportunity. Silla, knowing
this, secretly practised bribery with Ihawi, and encouraged
 him to oppose the passage of Kena no Omi's army. Hereupon
 Ihawi occupied the two provinces of Hi 3 and Toyo/ and would
 not allow the taxes to be paid. Abroad he intercepted the
 route by sea, and led astray the yearly tribute ships from the
 countries of Koryo, Pekche, Silla, and Imna, while at home
 he blocked the way for Kena no Omi's army which was being
 sent to Imna. He lifted up his voice in abusive language,
 saying :-" Thou who hast now become an envoy wast for-
 merly my companion. We rubbed shoulders and touched
 elbows; we ate the same food from the same vessels. How
 canst thou lightly be made an envoy, and make me come freely XVII. 19.
 and prostrate myself before thee? " He at length fought and
 would not receive him; he was haughty and self-conceited.
 For this reason Kena no Omi was prevented midways from
 proceeding on his journey, and was detained. The Emperor
 addressed Kanamura, Ohotomo no Ohomuraji, Arakahi, Mono-
  nobe no Ohomuraji, and Wobito, Kose no Oho-omi, saying :-
 "Ihawi of Tsukushi has rebelled, and has occupied the terri-
 tory of the western wilds. Whom shall we now make general? "
 Ohotomo no Ohomuraji and the others all said :-" For
 uprightness, humane bravery, and acquaintance with military
 matters there is at present no one who goes out to the right of a
  Arakahi." The Emperor said :-" Be it so."
   1 His name was Myongnye I!JJ     iI.           2 Back again to Y amato~
   3 No\v Hizen and Higo.                         4 Buzen and Bungo.
   i i.e. excels. This is a Chinese phrase.   The left is no\v the honourable
 side; at one time the right was so.
         16                               N IIIONGI.
              Autumn, 8th month, 1St day. The Emperor made a decree,
          saying :-" Ah, Ohomuraji ! I here is this Ihawi who will not
          obey us. Do thou go and chastise him." The Ohomuraji,
          Mononobe no Arakahi, with repeated obeisances, said :-" Ah !
          Ihawi, that unprincipled knave of the western wilds, relies on
          the impediments of rivers, and does not appear at Court. He
          trusts to the steepness of the mountains, and stirs up disorder.
           He subverts virtue and acts contrary to principle; he is
          insolent and wise in his own conceit. From Michi no Omi
          in ancient times down to Muruya 3 at present (there have been
          ministers who) have fought at the same time both for their
          Emperor and to rescue the people from misery. This is
XVII. 20. simply owing to the help of Heaven, and thy servant has
          al,vays been impressed with its importance. How should he
          fail reverently to smite them? "
              The Emperor charged him, saying :-" The generalship of a
          good commander consists in dispensing kindness and exercising
          forbearance: he rules others with the leniency he shows to
          himself. In attack he is like the bursting forth of a river, in
          combat he resembles the rising of the storm." Again he
          charged him, saying :-" On a great commander depends the
          li,res of the people and the existence of the State. Be earnest,
          and reverently execute the Celestial punishment." The Em-
          peror took up the battle-axe 4 in his own hands, and delivered it
          to the Ohomuraji, saying :-" We will control the country
          from Anato eastward; do thou hold sway over the land from
          Tsukushi westwards. Dispense rewards and punishments
          absolutely, and trouble not thyself to make frequent reference
          to Us."
A.D. 528.     22nd year, Winter, 11th month, 11th day. The Commander-
          in-chief Arakahi, Mononobe no Ohomuraji, taking personal
          commalld, engaged battle with the rebel leader, Ihawi, in the
          district of Miwi in Tsukushi. The flags and drums approached
          close to each other, the dust (from both armies) became
          mingled. The critical moment for the two armies arrived,
          and the position was such that ten thousand deaths seemed

                1   i.e. Arakahi.                ~   See above, \t 01. I. p. I 17.
                a Muruya was Kanamura's father.
                4   An elnbleln of authority.
                                   KElDAI.                                     17
unavoidable. At length he slew Ihawi, and eventually subdued
the frontier land. l
   12th month. Kuzu, Kimi of Tsukushi, fearing to be involved XVII. 21.
in his father's execution, offered to the Emperor the Granary 2
of Kasuya, asking to be allowed to ranSOlTI his life.
   23rd year, Spring, 3rd month. The King of Pekche ad- A.D. 52 9
dressed Oshiyama, Hodzumi no Omi, Governor of Lower Tari,
saying :-" Now our tribute envoys have always to avoid the
headlands and expose themselves to the winds and waves. In
consequence of this the goods they bear become wet and
wholly spoiled and unsightly. I pray that thou wilt make the
Port of Tasa in Kara the crossing route by which to send thy
servant's tribute." Oshiyama no Omi nlade application to
 the Emperor accordingly.
   This montll Kasone, Mononobe no Ise no Muraji, Kishi no
 Okina,3 and others were sent to make over the Port to the
 King of pekche. Hereupon the King of Kara spoke to the
 Imperial Envoys, saying :--" This Port ever since the esta-
 blishment of the (Japanese) Government House has been the
 port of passage for your servant's tribute. How can you \vith-
 out grave reason change this state of things and grant it to a
 neighbouring country, contrary to the original definitive en-
 feoffment of this territory?" The Imperial Envoy Rasone and
 his colleagues were accordingly unable to make the grant
   1 According to the " Tsukushi Fudoki," the tOlnb of Iha\\'i \\9as, at the tillle

of writing, to be seen t\VO ri to the south of Kami-tsullla no agata. " The
height of the Inound \\ras seven rods (of ten feet, no doubt measul·ed along
the slope), and its circuit six rods (something \vrong here). '[he ground
belonging to the tomb was sixty rods from north to south, and forty frOlll
east to \vest. (This looks like a double 1110und) On all four sides there
are sixty stone men, with stone shields, arrayed against each other in ordel-
of battle. At the north-east corner there is a separate plot of ground,
called the kitchen. In this there is one stone nlan, in a standing position,
\vho is called' the carver,' and in front of him a naked figure prostrate on
the ground, called' the thief.' On the side there are four stone pigs, called
, the plunder.' In that place, moreover, there are three stone horses, three
stone halls, and two stone \varehouses. The oldest inhabitants say that
 Ihawi had this place constructed in his lifetime."
    Some of these remains are still in existence, and I rather think that it is
one of the stone figures \vhieh is no\v in the Uyeno Museurn at Tokio.
   2 :I\liyake.

   3 Kishi was originallY'a Corean rank; Okina 111eans old man.
            18                                NIHONGI.

XVII. 22.   openly. They retired to Ohoshima and sent a clerk specially,
            by whom the grant to Pu-yo' was effected. Owing to this,
            !{ara allied itself to Silla 2 and bred hatred against Japan. The
            King of Kara married the King of Silla's daughter, who
            eventually had issue by him. When Silla first sent a daughter,
            100 men were sent away with her as her escort.          When they
            \vere received, they were dispersed throughout the districts of
            the country, and allowed to wear the Silla costume. But
            Arasateung 3 railed at their strange 4 garments and sent
            messengers to return them secretly. Silla felt greatly insulted.
            He changed his mind and tried to get his daughter back,
            saying :-" Formerly, when I received thy marriage proposals,
            I sanctioned the alliance. But since matters are now so, I
            request that the Princess may be restored to me." Kwi-pu-ri
            Chika of Kara [unclear] answered and said :-" How can
            husband and wife be sundered again when they have once
            become united? Moreover there are children. What will
            become of them if they are abandoned?" In the end it came
            to pass that (Silla) captured the three castles of To-ka, Ko-phi,
            and Phona mura.& He also took five castles on the northern
            frontier.
               In this month Afumi no Rena no Omi was sent to Ara 6 to
            urge Silla, in the Enlperor's name, to re-establish Southern


               1 Puyo or ~~uyu is an ancient name of pekche.        It is properly the nan1e
            of a region north of Corea ",hence the Pekche royal family derived their
            origin. Southern Puyo was adopted as the official nalne of Pekche in A.D.
            538, according to the" Tongkam," V. 14.
               2 The" Tongkanl" (A.D. 522) speaks of Silla giving a lady of royal blood

            (though not the king's daughter) in ll1arriage to Kaya. The two kings had
            a friendly nleeting in 527.
               3 A note to the" Shukai" says that Arishito (or Arasateung, according to the

            Corean pronunciation of the characters) was the King of Kara. No doubt
            some high official is intended. See Vol. I p. 166.
               4 Silla, according to the" Tongkam," first regulated official costume, no

            doubt on the Chinese lTIodel, in A.D. 520. It was apparently these gannents
            that excited the reprobation of Kara.
               • Mura is apparently the saine as the Japanese \vord mura, village. There
            is a Corean \vord muri, assemblage, "7hich seems to be the same root. An
            old Chinese author says that the Silla word for castle or city is kien-lnu.la.
            Kien, I imagine, is kheun, great, and Inula is for ll1ura. See belo\v, X\'I I. 24.
               6 One of the ten provinces of Imna, says the" Shukai ;, editor.
                              KEIDAI.                                  19

Kara 1 and Tok-sa-than. Pekche sent the Lord-General
Yun-kwi Ma-na, Kap-pe Ma-ro and others to Ara respectfully
to hear the Emperor's decree. Silla, fearing lest the Govern- XVII. 23-
ment which he had established in the frontier provinces should
be destroyed, did not send a grandee. He only sent Pu-chi-
na-ma-nye and Hye-na-ma-nye to Ara respectfully to listen to
the Imperial decree. Hereupon Ara built a new High-Hall,
into which the Imperial Ambassador was led up, the ruler of
the country ascending the staircase behind him. One or two
of the local grandees had already ascended the Hall, but the
Pekche envoys, the Lord-General, and the others remained
below. The consultations were repeated for many months 2 in
the Hall above, until the Lord-General and the others grevv
angry at having to remain in the Court)'ard.
   Summer, 4th month, 7th day. Kwi-neung-ma-ta:1 Kanki,
King of Imna;' came to Court. [Kwi-neung-ma-ta ,vas doubt-
less the Arasateung.] He addressed Kanamura, Ohotomo no
Ohomuraji, saying :-" The sev~ral frontier provinces beyond
the sea, ever since the time of the Emperor in the womb, have
had Interior Government Houses placed in them. My land
has not been abandoned, but the territory has been enfeoffed
to me, not without good reason. But now Silla, in defiance of
this original definitive enfeoffment, has frequently crossed the
borders and invaded us. I pray, therefore, that thou wilt
represent this to the Emperor, so that he may come to the
assistance of his servant's country." The Ohomuraji, Oho-
torno, in aCGordance with his request, laid the matter before
the Emperor.
   In this month an envoy was sent to escort Kwi-neung-ma-ta
Kanki, and at the same time to convey to Afumi no Kena no
Omi, who was resident in Imna, the instructions of the
Emperor to investigate thoroughly the matter represented to
him, and in a friendly way to dissipate their mutual suspicions.
Hereupon Kena no Omi lodged at Kumanare i [one book

 J   See above, p. 15.         ~ The" Shukai " corrects this to " days."
 3   The traditional Kana is KonOlnatta.
  .. The "Shukai" has a note that Imna is Kara. The nalne given here is
not that of the King of Kara at this time. He nlay have been only a
prince.
  ~ Or Eung-chon, i.e. Bear-river. See Vol. I. pp. 23 2 , 368.
            20                             NIHONGI.

XVII. 24. says he lodged at Kusa-mura in ImnaJ, whither he summoned
          together the kings of the two countries, Silla and Pekche.
          Cha-ri-chi,l King of Silla, sent Ku-chi-pu-nye 2 [one book says
          Ku-nye-ni-sa-chi and (?) U -na-sa-ma-ri], and Pekche the
          Eunsol 3 Mi-teung-ni, to proceed to meet together at the
          place where Kena no ami was. But the two kings did not
          attend in person. Kena no Omi \vas much incensed, and
          called the two envo~ys to an account for it, saying :-" It is the
          law of Heaven that the Small should wait upon the Great.
           [One book say's :-' To the end of a great tree, you join a
          great tree; to the end of a small tree, ~you join a small
          tree.'] Why do the kings of the two countries send envoys in
          this disrespectful way instead of coming in person to the
          meeting and receiving the Emperor's commands? But now,
          even if your kings came themselves to hear the Imperial com-
          mands, I would not consent to deliver them, but would surely
          drive them away." Ku-chi-pu-nye and the Eunsol Mi-teung-
          ni, with dread in their hearts, returned each to his own country
          to call his king. Accordingly, Silla sent another envoy, the
          Chief Minister, I-cheul-pu-nye-chi Kanki, with a following of
          three thousand men, to conle and ask leave to hear the Imperial
          commands. Kena no Omi, seeing from afar that he was being
          encompassed by several thousand armed men, left Kumanare
          and entered the castle of Kwi-cheul-kwi-ri 4 in Imna. I-cheul-
          pu-nye-chi Kanki took up his lodging on the plain of Tatara,
XVII. 25. and, not daring to go back, waited for three months, requesting
          leave repeatedlyr to hear the Imperial message. But to the last
          its communication was not vouchsafed him. Some men under
           I-cheul-pu.. nye-chi's command were begging for food in the
          villages when they passed Mikari, Kahachi Mumakahi no
          Obito, a retainer of Rena no Omi. Mikari went in and hid
           behind somebody's gate, and, waiting till the beggars were
          passing, clenched his fists and struck at them from afar. The
           beggars, seeing this, said :-" We have waited patiently for

              1 The ,. Tongkaln " calls the King of Silla at this time Pop-hung. This is
            the posthumous nanle. His nanle in life was \Von-chong. Neither
            agrees with the name given here.
              Z Ku-chi-pu-nye.   rfhe Japanese pronunciation is Kuchi .. fure.
              3 The Eunchol were the third class of Pekche dignitaries.

              4 Koshikori is the traditional Kana pronunciation.
                                 KEIDAI.                                     2 1

three months in hopes of hearing the Emperor's \vill. But
you still refuse to communicate it, and harass the envoys who
have been sent to listen to the Imperial message. Hence, we
see that your object is to befool and put to death the Chief
Minister." So they reported to the Chief Minister all that
they had seen, and he thereupon seized four villages, Keum-
kwan,l He-mu, A-ta, and Wi-tha [one book says Tatara,
Sunara, A-ta, and Pi-chi were the four villages~ , took possession
of all the people and their goods, and \vithdrew to his own
country. Some said that it was the fault of Kena n() Omi that
these four villages, Tatara and the rest, were plundered.
  Autumn, 9th month. The Oho-omi, Kose no Obito, died.
   24th year, Spring, 2nd month, 1st day. The Emperor made A.D. 530.
an edict, saying :-" From the Emperor Ihare-hiko 2 until
King Mimaki,3 all (the sovereigns) put their trust in learned
Ministers and enlightened assistants. Therefore I\1ichi no               I


Omi propounded the policy, and divine Japan 5 flourished.
Ohohiko enounced plans, and Inihe 6 was exalted. Among those
Princes of succeeding generations who were successful in re- XVII. 26.
establishing what had fallen into decay, what one has there
ever been who did not rely upon wise counsels? Now, coming
down to the time \vhen the Emperor W ohatsuse ruled the
Empire, auspiciously receiving it over from the previous sages,
there was long peace and prosperity, during which morals
became gradually deteriorated, and there was no a,vakening,
while the Government became gradually steeped in decay, and
there \vas no reform. But he looked out for (proper) men,
and each had advancement after his kind. If a man had great
capacity, his shortcomings were not inquired into; if he had
high abilities, his failures were not found fault \vith. It was
for this reason that this Emperor was enabled to serve the
ancestral shrines, and not to endanger the Temples of the
 Land and of Grain. Judging from this, could he have been
wanting in enlightened assistants?

  1   The present Keulnhe, then capital of }(ara.              ~ Jimnlu Tenno.
  a Sujin Tenno.       There seenlS no particular reason \vhy one should be
called a King ::E, and the other an Enlperor  Wi.
   4 Michi Ineans '" path," "1110ral principle."    Vide Vol. I. p. 117.
   i Or Yamato.

  lfi i.e. Siijin 'fenno, says the" Tsii-sh6 :, comlnentary.
         22                               N II-IONGI.
             During the twenty-four years which have elapsed since we
          took over the Imperial office, the Empire has enjoyed prosperity,
          and there have been no anxieties at home or abroad. The
          veins of the earth have been fertile and the crops have reached
          maturity. Our secret fear is that the masses may in conse-
          quence of this acquire a habit, and that depending on it they
          may become proud. Therefore let men be made to practise
          honest thrift, and let the Great Morality be inculcated, so that a
          mighty progress may be diffused abroad. From of old it has
          been hard to appoint the right men to office. Now that this
          duty has devolved upon Ourselves, ought we not to be
          \vatchful ? "
             Autumn, 9th month. An envoy from Imna made represen-
XVII. 27. tation to the Emperor, saying :_H It is now two years since
          Kena no Omi proceeded to Kusamura, where he built a house
          and took up his residence.
                  The statement in one book that it was three years
               includes the year of going and coming.
          But he is remiss in the discharge of his Governmental duties.
          No,\! there are frequent disputes between the people of Japan
          and the people of Imna respecting children, l which are difficult
          to settle. None of these has ever been decided. Rena no ami
          is fond of setting (the caldrons for) the ordeal by boiling water,
          and saying :-' Those who are in the right will not be scalded:
          those who are false will certainly be scalded.' Owing to this
          many persons have been scalded to death by plunging into the
          hot water. Moreover he has put to death Natari and Sapuri,
          Corean children of Kibi.
                  The children born of 1apanese marriages with barbarian
               women were accounted Kara..ko. 2
          He constantly harasses the people, and there is never any
           amicable solution of difficulties." Hereupon the Emperor,
          hearing of this conduct, sent a man to recall him. But he
          would not come. He took the trouble, however, to send
           Mikari, Kahachi no Miima-kahi no abita up to the capital with
          a nlessage for the Emperor, saying :-" If thy servant returned
          to the capital before carrying out the Imperial instructions, his
          toil of travel ,vould cottle to nothing. Ho\v should he get over

           1   The progeny of mixed unions..       2    i&e. Corean or Kara children.
                                 KEIDAI.                                   22

his mortification? He humbly" beseeches Your Majesty to
await the execution of the national instructions. He will then
proceed to Court and confess his faults." After sending off
this messenger, he further took counsel with himself, saying:-
"That Mitsugi 1 no Kishi is also an Imperial envoy'. If he
arrives back before me, and represents ffi)Y offences to the
Emperor as the)' really are, the)' will certainly be aggravated."
So he sent Mitsugi no Kishi at the head of a force to guard the
Castle of Isachi mura. Hereupon the Arisateung, seeing- that
a trivial matter \vas being made of great importance, would
not apply himself to what was expected of him, but repeatedly
urged his 2 returning to Court. But he persisted in his refusal
to let him return. By this all his conduct was understood, and
in their hearts a spirit of revolt was begotten. So he 3 sent XVII. 28.
Kunyesakwimo to Silla to ask for troops, and Nosukuri to Pekche
to ask for troops. Kena no Omi, hearing of the arrival of the
Pekche forces, \vent out against them and attacked Pe-phyong.
 [Pe-phyong is the name of a place-also called Ung-pi-k\\'i-pu-
ri. 4 ] Half were killed or wounded. Pekche accordingly seized
Nosukuri, punished him with handcuffs, and put him in the
cangue and chains. Then, along with Silla they laid siege to
the castle, and demanded of the Arisateung with imprecations
that Kena no Omi should be produced. But Kena no Omi
clung to his castle and made a vigorous defence. His strength
,vas such that he could not be taken prisoner. Upon this the
two countries measured out a suitable piece of ground, where
they settled down for a month and built a castle. They then
retired. This castle was called Kunye mura. On their way
home the)T captured the five fortified places of Teung-ni-ki-
mura, Puna-mura, Mu-cha-ki-mura, A-pu-ra-mura, and Ku-chi-
pha-ta-ki.  I)


     \Vinter, loth month. ~Iitsugi no Kishi arrived from Imna
  1   Mitsugi means tribute or taxes. Kishi is a title, originally Corean.
  ~   Mitsugi no Kishi's.                 3 The Arisateung-.

   -I Perhaps the last three syllables are lneant for the Corean word Ko- eul,

a district, the Japanese kori. The first syllable Ung means bear.
   5 These names are written with Chinese characters, used phonetically in

a \vay which conveys the idea that the author of the " Nihongi " considered
them to be Corean \vords. But mura is untnistakably the Japanese word
for village, and the names too are probably Japanese, viz. Toriki-ml1ra,
Funa-mura, Mushiki-lTIUra, Abura-mura, and Kuchihataki.
                 22                              NIlfONGI.

          and informed the Emperor of Kena no Omi's arrogant and
          perverse disposition. "He was inexperienced (he said) in the
          administration of government, and never brought about
          amicable solutions. He disturbed Kara. Moreover he followed
          his own impulses in a high-handed manner, while he at the
          same time put up with evils and did not prevent them."
          Therefore Medzurako was sent to recall him.
             In this year, Kena no Omi, having received the summons,
XVII. 29· proceeded as far as Tsushima, where he fell ill, and died. His
          funeral followed up the course of the river,l and so entered
          Afumi.
             His wife made a song, saying : -
                                     To Hirakata
                                     With the rnusic of flutes he goes up-
                                     The youth of Kena
                                     Of Afumi,
                                     With the music of flutes goes Up.2

                   When Medzurako 11rst arrived in Imna his a people who
                 remained in that country sent a song, saying: -
                                          The land of Kara,
                                          How should it be called so?
                                          Medzurako has come!
                                          By the crossing of Iki-
                                          Opposite and afar,
                                          Medzurako has come! 4

A.D.   53 1 ..     25 th year, Spring, 2nd month. The Emperor took very ill.
                 7th day. The Emperor died in the Tamaho Palace at Ihare, at
                 the age of 82. 6
                    1 The Uji River.

                    ~ Hirakata is the nalne of a place in the province of Afumi or Omi. The
                 v.'ord Wakugo, youth, has here a suffix i, \vhich is now wholly obsolete. It
                 is found, however, occasionally in the ,,; Manyoshiu," and may be identical
                 with the Corean suffix i, a sort of definite article.
                    f"unerals \vere accompanied by the ll1usic of flutes, as appears from other
                 ancient notices.
                    3 i.e. Kena no Omi's.

                    4 Kara llleans "acrid, cruel, hard," as \vell as the country. In Medzurako
                 there is an allusion to the adjective Medzurashiki, "strange, rare.'; The
                 song expresses the satisfaction of the people of Kena no Omi's household in
                 having Medzurako set over them instead of their own master.
                    D The" Kojiki " has forty-three, no doubt wrongly.
                                  KEID.AI.                                   22

  Winter, 12th mon.th, 5th day. He was buried in the
misasagi on the A\vi plain. l
       A certain book says :-" The Emperor died in the 28th
    year of his reign, namely the year Kinoye Tara. The state-
    ment in the text that he died in the 25th year of his reign,
    viz. the year Ranoto I, is taken from a passage in the
    'Original Record' of pekche. This passage runs as
    follows: 'In the year Kanoto I of the Cycle, the 3rd
    month, an army advanced to !l.ra and constructed the
    fortified place of Kwi-tok. In this month Koryo slew
    their king An. It is said, moreover, that the Enlperor of
    Japan with the Prince Imperial died at the same time and
    were buried.' This was the authority on which the state-
    ment was made. The year Kanoto I corresponds to the
    25th year of the reign. Later inquirers may ascertain
    which is correct." 2

   1 In Settsu. 1'his 111isasagi is visible fronl the raihvay, on the left as one
goes from Osaka to Kioto.
   2 The uncertainty about this date sho\vs ho\v ilnperfect the chronological

records must have been even at this late period.
   There is this difficulty about making Keidai die in the 28th year of his
reign. He was then 82, and his son died the follo\ving year, aged 70, which
"'ould lnake hhn born when his father ,,~as only 13. One chronological
\vork suggests that there was an interregnum. But this is contrary to the
positive statement in the" Nihongi."
                                   BOOK XVIII.

           THE EMPEROR MAGARI NO OHOYE (OR OHINE) HIRO-KUNI
                                   OSHI-TAKE KANAHI. 1


                                (ANKAN2 TENNO.)

         THE      Emperor Magari no Ohoye Hiro-kuni Oshi-take was the
           eldest child of the Emperor Wohodo. His mother's name was
           Menoko-hime. As to the Emperor's character, the walls were
           10ft)7, so that one could not peep in. 3 He ,vas brave and
           generous, and had the capacity of a ruler of men.
              In the 25th year of his reign, Spring, the 2nd month, the 7th
           day, the Emperor Wohodo established OhO)Te as Emperor, and
           on the same day he died. 4
              In this month Ohotomo no Kanamura no Ohomuraji and
           Mononobe no Arakahi no Ohomuraji were made Ohomuraji,
           both being continued in their previous offices.
 A.D. 534-    1st year, Spring, 1St month. The capital was removed to
           Magari no Kanahashi, in the province of Yamato, by which
           name the palace It was called.
              3rd month, 6th day. On behalf of the Emperor, functionaries
           took wedding presents to the Imperial Princess Kasuga no
XVIII. 2. Yamada, daughter of the Emperor Ohoke,6 and made her
           Empress 7 [otherwise called the Imperial Princess Yamada no

           1 Magari is the name of a place.    Ohoye or Ohine ll1eans the elder of a
         family. The rest is literally" wide-country-push-valiant-lnetal-sun."
           2 Ankan, "easy-space."

           3 An allusion to a passage in the "Analects of Confucius."     See Legge's
         edition, p. 21 I. The meaning is that he was of a reserved disposition, and
         not easy to understand and appreciate.
           .. The 25th year of Keidai's reign is A.D. 531. Ankan succeeds him at
         once, yet his 1st year is A.D. 534. See above, p. 25.
           o i.e. the Kanahashi Palace.                        6 Ninken Tenno.

           7 This was only a formal installation. The real marriage took place in the
         7th year of Keidai's reign.
                                  ANKAN.                                   27
Akami]. There were, besides, three consorts appointed, viz.,
Satehime, daughter of Kose no Wobito no Oho-omi, Sate-
hime's younger sister, Kagarihime, and Yakahime, daughter
of Mononobe no Itahi no Ohomuraji.
   Summer, 4th month, 1st day. The High Ste",rard, Oho-
maro Kashihade no Omi; b~y command of the Emperor, sent a
messenger to Ishimi 2 to get pearls. The Kuni no Miyakko of
Ishimi delayed coming to the capital, and the time passed
without their delivering them. Ohomaro Kashihade no Omi
was greatly incensed, and, having seized and bound the Kuni
no Miyakko, interrogated them as to the reason. '1..lakugo no
Atahe and the other Kuni no Miyakko were afraid, and ran
away, and concealed themselves in an inner chamber of the
hinder-palace. 3 The Empress Kasuga, una\\'are that they had
come straight in,4 was startled, and fell down deeply ashamed.
Wakugo no Atahe and the others, being already convicted of
the crime of intrusion, and having become liable to severe
punishment, humbly offered the Empress the Miyake 5 of
Ishimi to be her absolute property, praying her to accept it by
,va)" of atonement for their offence of intrusion. A settlement
,vas therefore made of the Miyake of Ishimi. It was now XVIII. 3.
divided and made into districts, which were attached to the
province of Kadzusa.

   1 Kashihade no On1i Ineans "ste\vard n1inister," so that here the nanle

and the office coincided, as they frequently did at this time.
   ~ In Kadzllsa.
   3 i.e. the EInpresses' apartlnents.

   4 Without 'Yarning or introduction.

   a The Miyake are frequently mentioned bela,,,. The word is defined in
Yamada's Dictionary as follows ;-" Mi nleans august; yake, house_ The
l\liyake ,,'ere granaries, in \vbich was stored the rice ,vhich the peasants
,,"ere made to cultivate on lands belonging to the government in the various
provinces. The term was also applied to the government buildings belong-
ing to theIn."
   This word is written in two ,vays in Chinese. One rendering means
store-house or granary, the other government house. The Miyake has t,vo
aspects corresponding to this distinction. They were primarily granaries
to ,vhich ,vere attached culti vated lands and serfs, and they ~'ere also local
centres of government. But the present and other passages sho,v that they
\\"ere frequently private property. The Japanese Residency in Imna is called
a Miyake, and even the kingdoms of Pekche and Silla are so termed. '[he
Miyake are evidently the o~der Be'somewhat Inodified. Cf. Vol. 1. p. 214.
         J26                                 N IHO!\GI.
             5th month. Pekche sent the Ha-pu Syu-tok, Tyok Tbk-son,
          and the Syang-pu 1 To.. tOk, Kwi Chyukwiru, to come and render
          the Imperial tribute, and separatel~y to present a memorial.
             Autumn, 7th month, 1st day. The Emperor made a decree,
          saying :-" The Empress, it is true, is of one body with the
          Emperor, but their designations, one being outer and the other
          inner, are quite distinct. Moreover let there be assigned a
          tract of Miyake land from (the revenues of) which to erect
          a Pepper 2 Court, so that after generations may hand down
          its memory."       Imperial Commissioners were accordingly
          appointed to select good rice-land. The Imperial Com-
          missioners, having received this charge, addressed Ajihari
          [otherwise called SatohiJ, Ohashi Kahachi no Atahe, saying :-
          " Thou shouldst now offer to the Emperor the fat rice-land of
          Kiji." Ajihari conceived a sudden grudging, and deceived
          the Imperial Commissioners, saying :-" This rice-land is
          subject to drought, and hard to irrigate. The surface water
          percolates readily, so that the expenditure of labour would be
          enormous, and the harvest very small." The Imperial Com-
          missioners, in accordance with these words, made their report
          to the Emperor without reserve.
             Winter, loth month, 15th day. The Emperor cOlnmanded
           Kanamura, Ohotomo no Ohomuraji, saying :-" Although we
          have taken to us four wives there has been up till now no heir.
          When ten thousand years have passed,3 OUf name will be extinct.
          \Vhat dost thou propose should now be done, Our uncle 4 of Oho-
          tomo ? Whenever we think of this, OUf anxiety knows no rest."
             Kanamura, Ohotomo no Muraji, addressed the Emperor,
XVIII. 4· saying :-" This is also a subject of anxiety to thy servant. It
          is necessary that all the sovereigns of this country who rule the
          Empire, whether they have heirs or not, should have something

           1   Official ranks.   Ha-pll and Syang..pu 111ean respectively Lo,ver and Upper
         Divi~ion.
            2 "The private apartnlents of the Empress, sa called because (I) an Empress

         of the Han had the ,valls of her palace smeared with pepper in order to
         generate warlnth, or (2) because she always had a supply of pepper flo\vers
         about her~ hoping- to be fruitful Lke theln ."--Giles.
           J i.e. ,,,hen I anl dead.

            4 Uncle, like cousin or brother in the mouths of European sovereigns, is

         only a term of friendly greeting.
                              ANKAN.                               J26

b}? \vhich they should have a name. I pray, therefore, that on
behalf of the Empress and thy other consorts Miyake lands
may' be- established, and made to remain unto future genera-
tions, so that relics of the past may be manifested."
   The Emperor commanded, saying :-" Be it so; let them be
speedil)? established." Kananlura, Ohotomo no Ohomuraji,
recommended to the Emperor that the Miyake of Oharida
with serfs 1 from every province should be granted to·Satehinle,
that the Miyake of Sakurawi [one book says, " And in addition
the Miyake of Chinuyama"] with serfs from every province
should he granted to Kagarihime, and that the Miyake of
Naniha \vith spade-labourers from every tiistrict should be
granted to Yakahime as an indication to posterity, and an
example by which to view the past. The Emperor com-
manded, saying :-" Let it be done as proposed."
   Intercalary 12th month, 4th day. The Emperor made a
progress to Mishima. Kanamura, Ohotomo no Ohomuraji,
was in attendance.
   The Emperor, through Ohotomo no Ohomuraji, made in-
quiry as to good rice-land of the Agata-nushi ~ Ihi.. bo. The
 Agata-nushi Ihi-bo was delighted beyond measure, and with
the utmost reverence and loyalty offered as a present Upper
 Mino and Lower Mino, Upper Kuhabara and Lower Kuha-
 bara, as well as land in Takefu, 40 cho in all. Ohotomo no XVIII. 5~
 Ohomuraji, by command of the Emperor, addressed him,S
 saying :-" Of the entire surface of the soil, there is no part
 which is not a Royal grant in fee; under the wide Heavens
 there is no place which is not royal territory. The previous
 Emperors therefore 4 established an illustrious designation and
 handed down a vast fame: in magnanimity they were a match
 with Heaven and Earth: in glory they resembled the sun and
 moon. They rode afar and dispensed their mollifying influence
 to a distance; in breadth it extended beyond the bounds of the
 capital and cast a bright reflection throughout the boundaries
 of the land, pervading everywhere without a limit. Above they

  1 Tana-be. See above, Vol. I. p. :2 14.
  ~ District.lord.                        3 i.e. Ajihari.

  " From this point to the end of the paragraph is taken from the Inonu-
Inent of a persollage named fin • 3:, of the Liang Dynasty of China.
  VOL. II.                                                    D
          J26                              NIHONGI.

           were the crown of the nine heavens: they passed abroad
           through all the eight points of the compass: they declared
           their efficiency by,'the framing of ceremonial observances: they
           instituted music/ thereby manifesting order. The resulting
           happiness was truly complete: there was gladness wllich
           tallied with that of past years. 2
              Now thou, Ajihari, being an obscure and insignificant subject
           of the realm, didst suddenly entertain a grudging as regards the
           lands of the Crown, and hast lightly disregarded the messenger.
           It is the Imperial will that thou, Ajihari, shalt henceforth cease to
           hold the office of Local Governor." Hereupon, the Agata-nushi
XVIII. 6. Ihibo's heart was filled with mingled joy and awe. He took his
           son Toriki and presented him to the Ohomuraji as a servant.
          Then Ajihari, Ohashi Kahachi no Atahe, was afraid, and had
          lasting regret. Prostrating himself on the ground, with the
          perspiration streaming from him, he addressed the Ohomuraji,
          saying :-" I am an ignorant subject, and my crime deserves
          ten thousand deaths. I pray humbly that I may be allowed
          to furnish from each district in spring-time five hundred spade-
          labourers, and in the tinle of autumn five hundred, for the
          Emperor's service. My descendants to all ages will pray for
          their lives in dependence on this, 3 and they will keep it before
         them for ever as an exemplary punishment." He separately
         presented to Ohotomo no Ohomuraji six cho of rice-land in
          Sawida. This seems to have been the origin of the labourers
         of the Agata of Kahachi being attached to the Miyake of
          Takefu in Mishima as serfs.
             This month Hatahime, daughter of Kikoyu, Ihoki be no
          Muraji, stole a necklace belonging to Okoshi, Ohotomo no
         Ohomuraji, and presented it to the Elnpress !(asuga. The
         matter was at length discovered, and Kikoyu gave his daughter,
         Hatahime, to be a servant of the U neme. [The Kasuga Be

            1 The itnportance of music as a means of governluent is often insisted on

         in the ancient Chinese literature. The interlinear version has here uta-l1zaz",
         " song and dancing," \vhich latter \vas no doubt included, Ceremony and
         Inusic are P:.lt generally for the pon1p and circumstance which are the life of
         an Inlperial Court.
            2 Here \ve have the Ilnperial theory fonnulated i n t~nns, be it noted,

         l\"hich are borro\ved entirely frOlll Chinese \\'ritings.
            3 i.e. this \vill be a perpetual ransom for the lives of n1Y descendants.
                               ANKAN.                                 31
Uneme. 1J He also presented (to the Emperor) the Miyake of
Ihokibe in Koshibe in the province of Aki, and therewith
redeemed his daughter's crime. Okoshi, Mononobe no Oho- X\TIII. 7
muraji, fearing that he might become implicated in the matter,
could not feel secure, and presented to the Emperor Towochi
Be, with Kusasa, Toi [Kusasa and Toi are names of two
villages], and N ihe no Hasebe, in the province of Ise, and also
Wisayamabe, in the Land of Tsukushi.
   The Kuni no Miyakko of the province of Musashi, ami,
Kasahara no Atahe, had a dispute with a relation named vVogi
as to who should be Kuni no Miyakko. This went on for
years and could not be settled. W ogi was of an obstructive
and rebellious disposition; he had a high spirit, unapt for com-
pliance. He secretly sought support from Wokuma, the I{uni
of Kamitsukenu,2 and conspired with him to kill ami. Omi
became aware of this, and made his escape to the capital,
where he informed the Court. When the matter came to be
decided, Omi was made Kuni no Miyakko, and \Vogi was
executed. Omi, Kuni no Miyakko, his breast filled \vith
mingled a\\1e and gladness, could not restrain himself, but
reverently offered to the State the four Miyake of Yokonu,
Tachibana, Ohohi, and Kurasu.
   This was the year Kinoye Tora (51st) of the Cycle.
   2nd year, Spring, 1st Month, 5th day. The Emperor made A.D. 535·
a decree, saying :-" Of late, for several successive years, the
crops have produced well; there have been no frontier anxieties:
the people take pleasure in their husbandry: my black-headed
subjects of every calling are free from famine: benign influences
extend agreeably over the universe: cries of admiration fill
Heaven and Earth: within and without serenity is every-
where diffused: the commonwealth is flourishing: Our joy is
extreme: let there be a Great Revel for five days, to the delight
 of the Empire."
    Summer, 4th month, 1st day. The Be of the Toneri of XVIII. 8.
 Magari was established, and the Be of the Yuki of Magari. 3
    5th month, 9th day. There were established the 1fiyake of

  ] i.e. The Empress's waiting·\\·olnen.          ! i.e. Kodzuke.

  3 These Be \vere evidently intended to commemorate the Emperor's narne.
The \Tuki were archers..
         32                              NIHONGI.

          Funami and Kama in Tsukushi, the Miyake of Tosa, Kuha-
          bara, Kato, Ohonuku and Aka in the province of Toyo, the
          Miyake of Kasuga be, in the province of Hi, the Miyake of
          Koshibe and U shika in the province of Harima, the Miyake of
          Shidzuki, Tane, Kukutsu, Hawaka, and Kaha-oto, in the further
          province of Kibi, the Miyake of lye and Itoshibe in the
          province of Ata,l the Miyake of Kasuga be in the province of
          Aha, the Miyake of Fuse and Kahabe in the province of Ki,
          the Miyake of Soshiki in the province of Tamba, the Miyake
          of Ashiura in the province of Afumi, the Miyake of Mashiki
          and Iruka in the province of Wohari, the Miyake of Midono
XVIII. 9. in the province of Kamitsllkenu, and the Miyake of Wakanihe
          in the province of Suruga. ~
            Autumn, 8th month, 1st day. By Imperial command Be of
          dog-keepers 3 were established in every province.
             9th month, 3rd day. The Emperor appointed Sakurawi
          Tanabe no Muraji, Agata no Inukahi no Muraji, and Naniha no
          Kishi, to the charge of the revenues from the Miyake.
            13th day. The Emperor specially commanded the Oho-
          muraji, saying :-" Let cattle be let loose on Ohosumi-jima,
          and in the fir-plain of Hime-jima at Naniha. By this ,ve hope
          that a name will be handed down to after times." 4
             Winter, 12th month, 17th day. The Emperor died in the
          palace of Kanabashi at Magari, at the age of seventy'.
             In this month" the Emperor was buried in the misasagi on
          the hill of Takaya at Ftlruichi in the province of Kahachi. In
          this misasagi there were buried along \vith the Emperor the
          Empress, ,",ho \vas the Imperial Princess Kasuga no Yamada,.
          and the Emperor's younger sister, the Princess Kamisaki. fJ

           I  Now part of Satsuma.
          2   This institution of !\-liyake seelns to show that the Central Governnlent
        \vas vigorously extending its po\ver in the provinces. The Iluperial theory
        was being translated into practice.
            a Inukahi, a frequent surnalne in old Japan. The" Shukai" says:-
        "They had probably charge of the dogs to guard the l\liyake against
        thieves."
            " In 717 A.D. an order ",'as given to discontinue the cattle-breeding estab-
        lishlnents of Ohosulni-jima and Hime..jitna, and to allo,v the peasantry to
        till the land.
           a Or Kanzaki.
                                 SENK\VA.                                 33
                                                                   1
         THE EMPEROR TAKE-WQ HIRO-KUNI OSHITATE.

                       (SENKWA 2 TENNO.)

   The Emperor Take-wo Hiro-kuni Oshitate was the second
child of the Emperor Wohodo, and the younger brother by
the same mother of the Emperor Magari no Ohoye Hiro-kuni XVIII. 10.
Oshitake Kanahi.
   The Emperor Magari no Ohoye Hirokuni Oshitake Kanahi
died in the 12th month of the second year of his reign,
leaving no heir. The Ministers in a body delivered up
the sword and mirror:{ to Takewo Hirokuni Oshitate no
1fikoto, and made him assume the Imperial Dignity. As to
his character, his capacity was unalloyed throughout, his
intelligence surpassingly bright, and he did not play the ruler,
making a boast to people of his abilities. Superior men gave
him their allegiance.
   1st year, Spring, 1st month. The capital was transferred to A.D. 536.
Ihorino in Hinokuma,4 whence the palace took its name.
   2nd month, 1st day. Ohotomo no Kanamura no Dho-
muraji and Mononobe no Arakahi no Ohomuraji were ap-
pointed Ohomuraji, both as before. Moreover, Soga no Inan1e
no Sukune was made Oho-omi and Abe no Ohomaro no Omi
Daibu.
   3rd month, 1st day. The functionaries petitioned that an
Empress might be appointed.
   8th day. The Emperor commanded, saying :-" Let her
who is already my proper i consort, viz. the Imperial Princess
Tachibana no Nakatsu, daughter of the Emperor Ohoke, be
appointed Empress." She bore to him one son and three
daughters. The eldest was called the Imperial Princess Ishi
hime,6 the next was called the Imperial Princess Koishi hime,7
the next was called the Imperial Princess Kura no Wakaya
hime, and the next the Imperial Prince Kamu-uye-ha [other- XVIII.lr.

  1 The elements of this Emperor's name are literally" valiant-small·wide-

country-push-shield."
  2 Senkwa Inearts " diffuse.. civilization."       3 The Regalia.

  4 In Yamato.              :; i.e. not a concubine         6 Stone-princess.

  ;' Little-stone-princess.
         34                               NIIIONGI.

           wise MarikoJ. He was the ancestor of the two families I of
           the Tajihi no Kimi and the Ina no Kimi. The concubine
           whom he already had" viz. Ohoshi Kahachi no Wakugo hime,
           ·bore to him one son, named the Imperial Prince Honowo.:1
            He was the ancestor of the Kimi of Shihida.
              Summer, sth month, 1st day. The Emperor made an edict,
           saying :--" Food is the basis of the Empire. Yellow gold and
           ten thousand strings of cash cannot cure hunger. 3 What
           avails a thousand boxes of pearls to him who is starving of
           cold? Now the province of Tsukushi is a place reached by
           visitors to our Court from far and near; it is a barrier passed
           by travellers going and coming. Therefore the countries
           beyond the sea, awaiting the water of the ocean,4 come as our
           guests: looking up to the clouds of Heaven, they bring us
           tribute. From the days of the Emperor in the womb 6 down to
XVIII. 12. Ourselves, grain has been stored up and hoards of provisions
           accumulated as a distant preparation for evil years, and for the
           cordial entertainment of our good guests. For the peace of
           our country there is nothing better than this. We therefore
           send Asomo no Kimi to transport thither a further supply of
           grain from the Miyake of the district of Mamuta in Kahachi.
           Let Saga no Oho-omi and Iname no Sukune send Wohari no
           Muraji to transport grain of the 1'Iiyake of the province of
           \Vohari. Let Arakahi, Mononobe no Ohomuraji send Nihinomi
           no Muraji to transport grain from the Miyake of Nihinomi.
           Let Abe no Omi send Iga no Omi to transport grain froIll the
           Miyake of the province of Iga. Let there be built a Govern-
           ment House at Nanotsu no Kuchi. 6 Moreover) the Miyake of
           the three provinces of Tsukushi, Hi, and Toyo are dispersed
           and remote: transport is therefore impeded by distance. In
           the case of an emergency it would be difficult to provide for
           sudden needs. Let the various districts therefore be charged
           each severally to transfer (the Miyake), and to erect one jointly
           at Nanotsll no Kuchi, thus making provision against extra-
           ordinary occasions, and long preserving the lives of the people.

           I   Lit. surnalnes.                      ~ Flame of fir~.
           3   I t must not be inferred from this that the Japanese had coin- at this
         tinle. It is simply a phrase borro\ved froul the Chinese.
            .. The tides.           5 6jin Tenno.               6 In Chikuzen.
                              SENK\VA.                              35
Speedily go do\vn to the districts (in question) and make kno\vn
to them Our behests."
   Autumn, 7th month. Mononobe no Arakahi no Ohomuraji
died.
   This year was the year Hinoye Tatsll (53rd) of the Cycle.
   2nd year, Winter, loth month, 1st day. By reason of Silla's A.D. 537.
hostility towards Imna, the Emperor commanded Ohotomo no
Kanamura no Ohomuraji to send his sons Iha and Sadehiko XVII!.I3·
to the assistance of Imna. At this time Iha staid in Tsukushi,
\vhere he took charge of the local Government, and made pre-
 parations against the three Han. l Sadehiko went to Jmna and
 restored peace there. He also lent aid to Pekche.
    4th year, Spring, 2nd month, loth day. The Emperor died A.D. 539.
 in the Palace of Ihorino in Hinokuma at the age of seventy-
 three.
    \Vinter, 11th month, 17th day. The Emperor was buried
 in the misasagi at the top of the acclivity of Tsukijima, in
 ~I usa, in the province of Yamato.
    There were buried with him in the same misasagi the
 Empress, viz. the Imperial Princess Tachibana and her infant
 child. 2
          There is no mention in the records of the year of the
       Empress's death. Probably the infant child had died
      before reaching manhood.

  Ii.e. Silla, Pekche, and Koryo.
  ~In Japanese ,vakugo. This word is also found as a proper natne, which
would account for the strange relnark of the" Original Comlnentary."
                            BOOK XIX.

                                                                     1
       THE EMPEROR AME-KUNI OSHI.. HIRAKI HIRO-NIHA.


                        (KIMMEl! TENNO.)

THE Emperor Ame..kuni Oshi-hiraki Hiro-niha was the right-
ful heir of the Emperor Wohodo. His mother's name was
the Empress Tashiraka. The Emperor loved him, and kept
him constantly at his side. When the Emperor was young
he had a dream, in which a man appeared to him, saying:-
" If thou makest a favourite of a man called Hada no Ohotsuchi,
thou wilt surely possess the Empire when thou dost attain to
manhood." When he awoke, he sent messengers to search
everywhere. They got from the province of Yamashiro, the
district of Kit and the township of Fukakusa, a man whose
name and surname were actually as in the dream. Upon this
joy pervaded his whole frame. "A dream without precedent! "
he exclaimed, and addressed him, saying :-" Has anything
happened thee?" He answered and said :-" Nothing. Only
\vhen thy servant was on his way back from Ise, whither he
had gone to trade, he fell in \vith two wolves 3 on a mountain,.
who were fighting with one another, and were defiled with
blood. Thy servant got down from his horse, and, having
rinsed his mouth and hands, made prayer to them, saying:-
, Ye are august deities, and :yet ye take delight in violence.

  1  Heaven-land push-open \vide-court.
  2  Kimmei. Legge renders this by "reverential, intelligent." Vide
" Shooking," p. 15-
   3 "No true wolf exists in Japan, but Canis hodophylax is a sort of lame

counterfeit of the European beast."-Dickins, in Satow and Hawes' " Hand-
book of Japan," p. [40 ]. Of the Ohokami, lit. "Great God," by which the
Chinese character for wolf is rendered, Dickins says) " If it exists, nothing
is kno\\'n of it to science."
                                 KIMMEl.                                 37
 If ye were to fall in with a hunter, very speedily ye should be
 taken.' So thy servant restrained them from fighting together,
and having wiped them and cleansed their blood-stained hair,
 eventually let them go, thus saving both their lives." The
 Emperor said :-" This is undoubtedly your reward." 1 So he
 made him to serve near his own person, and treated him with
 a favour which was daily renewed, so that he arrived at the
 height of great wealth. When the Emperor came to the throne, XIX. 2.
 he appointed him to the Treasury.
    In Winter, the loth month of the 4th year of his reign, the
 Emperor Takewo hiro-kuni oshi-tate died. The Imperial
 Prince, the Emperor 2 Ame-kuni oshi-hiraki hiro-niha, ad-
dressed the Ministers, saying :-" I am young 3 in years, and of
shallow knowledge. I have not yet had experience of the
affairs of government. The Empress Yamada has a clear
acquaintance with all matters of administration, and I pray
you to apply to her and then decide."
   The Empress Yamada rendered humble thanks, saying:-
"Your handmaiden has been treated with favour, far be~yond
seas and mountains. But the manifold machinery of govern-
ment is much too difficult a charge for a woman to undertake
it. Now the Imperial Prince honours age, and shows affection
to the young. He treats the wise with courtesy, and all day
long neglects his food while he attends to others. Not only
so, but young as he is, the point comes through." Already he
has at his disposal an auspicious reputation, he is of a mild
disposition and earnest in compassionate care. I pray the
Ministers that they will, without delay, cause him to ascend
to the Dignity, and preside gloriously over the Empire."·
   12th month, 5th day. The Imperial Prince Ame-kuni oshi-

  ) i.e. his being' recommended to the Emperor in a dream.
  2.!Jic.
   3. A brother had died four years before, aged seventy, and another had
just died, aged seventy-three. Kimmei is said to have died A.D. 571, at the
age of sixty-three, or eighty-one, by another account. Evidently the
chronology is not yet quite satisfactory.
  " An allusion to the Chinese saying," Talent will show itself: like an awl
in a bag, the point comes through." Vide Giles, p. 130<).
  , The Empress's speech is composed aln10st \vholly of sentences from
Chinese authors.
         J26                           NlIiONGI.

          hiraki hiro-niha assumed the Imperial Dignit)T. The Empress
          was honoured with the title of Grand Empress. Ohotomo no
 XIX. 3. Kanamura no Ohamuraji and ~f ononobe no Okoshi no Oho-
          muraji were made Ohamuraji, and Saga no Iname no Sukune
          no Oho-ami was made Oho-omi, all as before.
A.D. 540.    1st year, Spring, 1st month, 15th day. The officials
          petitioned for the appointment of an Empress. The Emperor
          gave command, saying :-" Let my proper consort, Ishihime,
          daughter of the Emperor Take-wo hiro-kuni oshi-tate,l be ap-
          pointed Empress."
             She bore him two sons and one daughter. The eldest was
          called the Imperial Prince Yata no Tama-katsu no Ohoye, the
          middle one ,vas called Wosada Nunakura Futo-damashiki no
          Mikoto, 2 the youngest was called the Imperial Princess Kasa-
          nuhi [otherwise called the Imperial Princess SatakeJ.
             2nd month. A man of Pekche named Kwi-chi-pu came
          over as an emigrant. He was settled in Yamamura, in the
          district of Sofu no Kami, in the province of Yamato. He was
          the ancestor of the present Kochifu 3 of Yamamura.
             3rd month.-The Yemishi and the HayatoJ both bringing
          their people with them, came and rendered allegiance.
             Autumn, 7th month, 13th day. The capital was removed to
          Shikishima, in the district of Shiki, in the province of Yamato.
          I t was accordingly called the Palace of Kanazashi in
          Shikishima.
             8th month. Karyn, Pekche, Silla and Imna all sent envoys
          to~ether to render tribute. The men of T'sin and of Han, etc.,
          tIle emigrants from the various frontier nations were assembled
          together, settled in the provinces and districts, and enrolled
 XIX. 4. in the registers of population. The men of'T'sin 4 numbered


           1 Senkwa Tenno.      She was therefore his niece, daughter of his half-
        brother by the father's side.
           2 Bindatsu Tenno.

           a The traditional Japanese rendering of the Corean nalne K\vichipu.
           .. T'sin and Han are the Chinese dynasties so called. These men must
        have been recent clnigrants froin China to Corea, or their near descendants
        who had not yet been merged in the general population. This statement
        throws light on Japanese ethnology. It shows that not only the upper
        classes, as appears from the "Seishiroku/' but the common people contained
        a l,arge foreign (Chinese and Corean) elen1ent.
                                 K Il\Il\IEI.                                39
 in all 7053 houses. The Director of the Treasury was made
 Hada 1 no Torno no Miyakko.
   9th month, sth day. The Emperor made a progress to the
 shrine of Hafuritsu 2 at N aniha. He was accompanied by
 Kanamura, Ohotomo no Ohomuraji, Inamochi, Kose no Omi,
and Okoshi, Mononobe no Ohomuraji. The Emperor inquired
of the Ministers, saying :-" How many troops ,,,ould be re-
 quired to conquer Silla?" Okoshi, Mononobe no Ohomuraji
and the rest addressed the Emperor, saying :-" \\Tith only a
few soldiers it \vould not be easy to chastise Silla. Formerly,
in the sixth year of the reign of the Emperor Wohodo, Pekche
sent envoys petitioning that the four districts of Imna, viz.
 Upper Tari, Lower Tari, Syata and Muro might be granted to
him.:3 Kanamura, Ohotomo no Ohomuraji readil~y agreed with
the request contained in this petition, and granted the demand.
In consequence of this, Silla has cherished resentment for
many years. Its chastisement should not be lightly under-
taken." Now Ohotomo no Kanamura staid in his house at
Sumiyoshi, 4 and, on the pretence of illness, did not attend
Court. The Emperor sent Ivlagariko, Awomi no Ohotoshi,
courteously to make kind inquiries. The Ohomuraji humbly
thanked the Emperor, and said :-" That which ails me is
nought else than this. The Ministers now sa)1 that it was I
who lost Imna. Therefore I ,vas afraid, and did not come to
Court." So he made a present to the messenger of a saddle-
horse, and showed him great friendliness and honour. A,vomi
no Ohotoshi made a faithful report to the Emperor, who com-
manded, saying :-" Thou hast long shown the utmost fidelity:
be not moved by what people may say." He acquitted him of
all guilt, and sho\ved hirrl increasing favour.
   This year was the year Kanoye Saru (57t11) of the Cycle.
   2nd year, Spring, 3rd month. The Emperor took to him A.D. 541.
five concubines. The senior concubine \vas the Imperial XIX. 5·
Princess Kurawakaya hime, )10unger sister of the Empress.
She bore to him the Imperial Prince Iso nb kami. The next
was also a younger sister of the Empress, named the Imperial
Princess Hikage.
   1  T'sin is called Hada in Japanese.
   2  Hafuri means a Shinto priest, tsu is probably the genitive particle.
   :i See above, p. 7.                    4 Or Suminoye, near Sakai.
        40                              !\IHONGI.

                  The statement made here that she was the Empress's
               younger sister is clear. This is the daughter of the Em-
               peror Hinokuma no Takada. 1 And yet in enumerating
               the consorts the name of her consort-mother and the name
               of the Imperial Princess do not appear. I do not know
               what writing it is taken from. Some future inquirer may
               discover. 2
         She bore to the Emperor the Imperial Prince Kura. The
         next was the daughter of Saga no Oho-omi, Iname no Sukune.
         Her name was Kitashi hime. She had seven sons and six
         daughters. The first was called the Imperial Prince Ohoye.
         He became Tachibana no Toyohi no Mikoto. 3 The second was
         called the Imperial Princess Ihane. [Also called the Imperial
         Princess Ime.] At first she was priestess to the great Deity
         of Ise, but ,vas aftervvards dismissed, being convicted of an
         intrigue with the Imperial Prince Mubaragi. 4 The third was
         called the Imperial Prince Atori. The fourth was called Toyo-
         mike Kashikiya no Mikoto. 5 The fifth was called the Imperial
         Prince Mariko. The sixth was called the IInperial Princess
         Ohoyake. The seventh was called the Imperial Prince Iso no
         Rami-be. The eighth was called the Imperial Prince Yama-
        shiro. The ninth was called the Imperial Princess Ohotomo.
        The tenth was called the Imperial Prince Sakurawi. The
        eleventh was called the Imperial Princess Katana. The twelfth
XIX. 6. \V·as called the Young Imperial Prince Tachibana ga moto. The
        thirteenth was called the Imperial Princess Toneri. The next
         (concubine) was a younger sister of Kitashi hime by the same
        mother, named Wonane-gimi. She bore four sons and one
        daughter. The first was called the Imperial Prince Mubaragi.
        The second was called the Imperial Prince Katsuraki.. The
        third was called the Imperial Princess Hasetsukabe Anahobe.
        The fourth was called the Imperial Prince Hasetsukabe

         1Senkwa Tenno.
         2These genealogies present Inuch that is obscure and contradictory.
      1'he ., Kojiki " varies. One thing, however, is clear, that the Emperors at this
      time married their o\vn half-sisters and other near relations.
        3 YOlnei Tenno.

        4 Or Ibaragi, or Uberagi.    He \\-'as her half·brother by the father's side,
      and cousin by the mother's side.
        o Suiko Tenno.
                                       KIMMEl.                                      41
 Anahobe. [Otherwise called the Imperial Prince Amatsuka
 no ko: one writing has, " otherwise called the Imperial Prince
 Sumuto." J The fifth was called the Imperial Prince Hasebe.

          One writing has :-" The first was called the Imperial
        Prince Mubaragi. The second was called the Imperial
        Princess Hasetsukabe Anahobe. The third was called the
        Imperial Prince Hasetsukabe Anahobe, otherwise called
       the Imperial Prince Sumuto. The fourth was called the
        Imperial Prince Katsuraki. The fifth was called the lIn-
       perial Prince Hasebe." One writing says :-" The first
       was called the Imperial Prince Mubaragi. The second
       was called the Imperial Prince SUffiutO. The third was
       called the Imperial Princess Hasetsukabe Anahobe. The
       fourth was called the Imperial Prince Hasetsukabe Ana-
       hobe, also called the Imperial Prince Amatsuka no ko.
       The fifth was called the Imperial Prince Hasebe." In
       the original record of the Emperors there are many old XIX. 7.
       characters, which underwent frequent alterations in the
       hands of the compilers. Later men, in learning to read
       them, modified them to suit the meaning, and, owing
       to their being handed down by repeated copying, errors
       eventually arose, by which the order was disturbed, and
       elder and younger mistaken for one another.                        We have
       no\v investigated old and new, and restored the truth.
       In cases where it was difficult to ascertain it, we have
       selected and followed one (MS. ?) and noted down carefully
       the variants. All other (passages) follow the same rule. l
  The next (consort) was the daughter of Kasuga no Hifuri no
Omi, by name Nukako. She bore the Imperial Princess
Kasuga no Yamada, and the Imperial Prince Tachibana no
Mara.

    1 It is difficult to say anything of the authorship of this note. It is clearly not
 from the pen of the compiler of the "Nihongi." The word I have rendered
." modified" is engrave (or carve)-alter (ftJ at), \vhich looks rather as if
 block-printing \\~ere referred to. This \vould bring the writer down to the
thirteenth century or thereabouts. The" original record of the Eluperors"
is very like the title of one of the parts of Sbotoku Daishi's "Kiujiki." See
below, XXII. 32. The Japanese comnlentators give no help here.
        J26                             NIIIONGI.

           Summer, 4th month. The second Kanki 1 of Ara named
        I-than-h)re, and the Te-pu-son Ku-chhyu-yu-ri, the Syang--syu--
        wi 2 of Kara named Kachyon-hye, the Kanki of Cholma named
        San-pan-h~ye, the Kanki's son, the junior Kanki of Tara named
        I-tha, Ko-tha son of the Kanki ofSa-i-ki-these Kanki, together
        with Kibi no Omi, the (Japanese) Commissioner for Jmna, pro-
        ceeded to Pekche, and together heard the Imperial edict read.
        S~yong-myong,3 King of Pekche, addressing the Kanki of Jmna
        and the others, said : -
           "The Emperor of Japan decrees that Imna shall be \\~holly
XIX. 8. re-established. Now by what means is this to be done? "Thy
        should not each of you with the deepest lo~yalty develop the
        sage purpose? " 4
           The Kanki of Jmna and the others ans\vered and said:-
        "Already t\VQ or three times proposals have been made to
        Silla, but no answer has been received. Let the present inten-
        tion be again communicated to Silla, and if there is still no
        reply, it \\rill now be well that all of us should send envoys to
        go and lay the matter before the Emperor. It will then depend
        on the Great King's will whether Tmna is to be established or
        not. We shall humbly receive his instructions. Who shall
        dare to offer a \vord of objection? Now the territory of Imna

          1 The Corean pronunciation of the Chinese characters \vould be Hanki,

       but here and below Kanki is no doubt the correct word.
          2 Syang-syu-\vi nleans "highest rank."

          3 The" Tongkam " calls him Syong.        It has only a fe\v \vords under this
       year, and nothing is said of the events here related.
          4 N ot\vithstanding the respectful terlns in \vhich the King of Pekche speaks

       of the Emperor of Japan, it \vould be a mistake to suppose that their rela-
       tions were those of suzerainty. The King of Pekche tnade war without
       consulting Japan, and several times during this century recei,"ed in,"estiture
       from the reigning Chinese Dynasty, as in 528 and 570. Possibly the
       Japanese historians may have garbled the docunlents before theln so as to
       make them read 1110re respectful to the rvlikado. But for the period we have
       now conle to it is not necessary to take this vie\'l. The kinglets of Corea
       very likely \vere not sparing of complimentary phrases \vhich cost them

       styled Japan  *
       nothing-. A Chinese author Inentions the fact that at this period the Coreans
                           11, or the Great Country.
          I am inclined to think that the ,vord Japan in this passage has been
       introduced retrospectively. If this had been the official designation of the
       country at this time, it would in all probability have been used in the letter
       addre~sed to the Enlperor of China in Suiko's reign.
                               KI~tl\1EI.                           43
is conterminous \vith Silla, and it is to be feared that this will
prove disastrous to Chhak-~yun, etc.
        By etc. is meant Tok-kwi-than and Kara. The reference
     is to the disaster of the conquest of Chhak-syun and the
     other provinces.
   King Syong-myong said :-" In former times, during the
reigns of ill)' ancestors, King Sok-ko 1 and King Kwi-syu,! the
 Kanki of Ara, Kara, and Chhak-syun first sent envoys and
entered into communication. \Ve became knitted together by
a cordial friendship, and they were treated as children or
younger brothers. It ,vas my hope that they should flourish
continuously. But no\\' they have been deceived by Silla and
have caused the Emperor to be wroth, and Imna to be angry.
This is the fault of me, the incompetent one, for which I am
profoundly sorr~y. I therefore sent Maro,3 the Ha-pu Chung-
cha-phyong, and Meno, the Syong-pang Kap-syo, to Kara to
meet the Imna authorities, and, having s\vorn together, there-
after earnestl)' and perseveringly to concert measures for the
establishment of Imna, \vithout forgetfulness either morning or
evening. No\v the terms of the Emperor's commands are-
, Let Imna be at once established.' I therefore wish to consult XIX. 9.
with you as to the nleans of setting up Inlna and the other
provinces. Let this matter be \vell weighed by you. Moreover
I shall send for Silla to the Imna frontier, and ask \vhether
he means to obey or not. Upon receiving his anS\\Ter \ve
can send envoys together to report to the Emperor and humbly
receive his instructions. If, ho\vever, before the return of the
envoys, Silla watches an opportunity and invades Imna, I ,viII
go to its assistance, so that there is no need for anxiety. Let
us, ho\vever, make good preparation to defend ourselves; let
us be \vatchful and not forgetful. As to what you specially
tell me, viz. that you fear disaster for Chhak-syun, etc., it is
not (merely) the aggressiveness of Silla which has made
this possible. Tok-kwi-than lies on the border between Kara
and Silla, and for several succeSSIve years has been harassed

   1 Probably King Syoko.                          ~ Kusyu.
   3 From this it \vould appear that M aro 1S a Corean nalue as well as
Japanese. It also occurs in Keidai Tenn~'s reign. Ha.pu means "lower
divi~ion.~' Chung-cha-phyong 1S the nalne of a high office in Corea.
        44                           NIHONGI.

         and defeated. Jmna has not been able to render it assistance,
         and it has therefore suffered ruin. South Kara, being a very
         small place, was unable promptly to make defence, and knew
         not whom to rely upon. Therefore it has come to ruin. As
         to Chhak-syun, the upper and lower classes practise double-
         dealing so much so as to wish voluntarily to join Silla and to
         hold secret communication with that object. Therefore it has
         come to ruin. Viewed in this light, the downfall of these three
         provinces had very sufficient causes.
            Formerly Silla asked help from Karyn, and ,vith its assistance
         invaded Imna and Pekche, but to this day without conquering
         them. How then could Silla alone destroy Imna? If you and
XIX. 10. I, the incompetent one, now join our powers, and with united
         hearts place our in\vard trust in the Emperor, Imna will
         assuredly be established."
            Each received presents according to his station, and they
         took their way homewards jo~yfully.
            Autumn, 7th month. Pekche, hearing that the (J apanese)
         authorities of Ara were intriguing with Silla, sent Pirimakko,
         Nasol of the Senior division, the Nasol Syon-mun, the Nasol
         of the middle division, Mok-hiop Me-syun, and Ki no ami,
                The Nasol Ki no Omi was probably the son of Ki no
              Omi by a marriage with a Corean woman, who therefore
              remained in the country and was made Nasol by pekche.
              It is not clear who his father ,vas. Other cases all follow
              this rule.
         the Nasol Mimasya, on a mission to Ara, to summon to
         them the agents of Silla and Imna, and to concert measures
         for the establishment of Imna. He separately reproved
         Kahachi no Atahe, the chief Japanese authority of Ara,
         roundly for intriguing \vith Silla.
                 The Pekche "Original Record" has Kapuchipi Atahe
              Akyoninasacharomato. This is not clear.
         Addressing Imna, he said :-" In past times, my ancestors,
         Kings Sokko and Kwisyu,1 were first joined in amity with the
         former Kanki. They became as it were brethren. I therefore
         look upon you as my children or younger brothers, and you
         regard me as a father or elder brother. Together we serve the

                                 1   See above, p. 43..
                                  KIM~rEl.                                   45
Emperor, and unitedly repel hostile violence, procuring up till
now the peace of the country and the integrity of the State.
When I think of the friendly language of my ancestors and the
former Kanki, it seems to me like the shining SUIl. From that XIX. II"
time to this, I have sedulously maintained friendship with my
neighbours and have always dealt honestly with the allied
countries. My affection for them passes that of flesh and
bones. 1 It was the constant prayer of me, the inept one, that
such a fair beginning might have a fitting end. I cannot
understand why people should lightly give credit to vague
rumours and for a space of several years should have impul-
sivelyabandoned their purpose. It may be said of such, in the
words of the men of old, that' they repent when it is too late.'
But if, as regards the present, they swear to the gods as far as
the cloud-spaces above, and down to the region within the
springs 2 below, and amend their faults so as to accord with the
past, revealing all that they do without the least reserve, so
that their loyalty penetrates to the spirits, and if they take
themselves severely to task, this may again be accepted. We
are told that of those who stand in the position of successors,
honour is to him who keeps well in the rut made by his pre-
decessors, and makes the hall and roof to prosper, thereby
accomplishing a meritorious service.3 I therefore wish to go
back and reverence the kindly feeling of the friendship of former
ages, and, in respectful obedience to the terms of the Emperor's
decree, rescue from Silla the provinces torn off by it, viz. South
 Kara, Tok-kwi..than, etc., and restoring them to their original
connection and making them transfer to Imna their substance, XIX. 12 ..
strive to play the part to them of father or elder brother, con-
stantly doing homage to Japan. It is this which deprives my
food of flavour, and robs me of peaceful slumber, my mind
 being full of anxious thought while I regret the past and
 practise self-discipline for the present.
   Now all the world knows Silla's blandishing \\I'ords and
 subtle deceptions. You, out of an indiscriminating confidence
  1  i.e. I love them more than a brother.
  2  i.e. the yello\v springs, or Hades.
   3 "When a deceased father, wishing to build a house. had laid out the plan,
if his son be un\villing to raise up the hall, how much less ,viII he be \villing
to con1plete the roof ~ "-Legge's " Shooking," p. 37 I.
  VOL. II.                                                            E
         J26                          NIHONGI.

          in them, have already fallen a prey to the designs of others.
          At the present moment, where the frontier of Imna borders on
          Silla, let there be permanent defensive preparations. How can
          your watchfulness be relaxed? Here it is to be feared lest you,
          having fallen into and become entangled in the nets and pitfalls
          of slanderous deceit, should ruin your country and overturn
          your State, becoming yourselves the captives of others. When
          I, the incompetent one, reflect on this, I am full of anxious
          thought, and can find no rest.
             It has come to my ears that during the meetings at which
          Silla and Jmna concerted their plans, there were manifested
          portents of trees and serpents. This is notorious to everybody.
          Now (ill) luck sent by the Powers of Evil l is for the sake of
          making people correct their conduct; natural catastrophes 1 are
         given for men's instruction. It is just in this way that Bright
          Heaven communicates to us as a lesson tokens of the former
          spirits. When misfortune has reached a climax, one may have
          remorse; when ruin has come, one may think of establishing
          himself again, but what avails it ?
             If you will now be guided by me and give obedience to the
          Emperor's command, Imna may be restored. Why should you
         apprehend ill-success? If you desire to hold permanently your
         original territory, and long to rule over your old subjects, here
         lies the means of doing so. Should yOll not be watchful? "
XIX~ 13·     King Syong-myong further addressed the Japanese authorities
         of Imna, saying :-" The Emperor's decree amounts to this : -
         'If Imna falls, you are left without resources; if Imna is
         established, you will in that case have succour. You should
         therefore join us in setting up Imna alld restoring it to its
         former position, so as to provide a help for yourselves and a
         kindly maintenance for your people.' Receive with respect the
         Imperial orders; let your hearts be filled with awe and dread,
         and make a vow to devote your earnest efforts. Thus it may
         be hoped that Jmna may be rendered prosperous, and long
         serve the Emperor, as in former times. Let us first consider

          1 The   Japanese interlinear version has tsuchi no wazawahi and arne
        no wazawahi, i.e. calalnities of earth, and calamities of Heaven. There
        seelns here a confusion between ill omens ~nd the calamities they
        portend.
                                 KI~IMEI.                                47
what is in the future, and then let us take repose. If you, the
Japanese authority, in full reliance on the Imperial decree, lend
aid to Imna, this \viII assuredly be attended by the En1peror's
approval, and you personally will reap re\vards.
    Moreover, the high ] apanese officials, having been long
resident in the Land of Jmna, close to the Silla frontier, are
acquainted with the state of affairs in that country. They have
not only for this year, but long been poisoning Imna, and
devising means of defence against Japan. The reason they
have not made up their minds to more active measures is that
 near, they C\.re ashamed in the eyes of Pekche, and afar, they
 fear the Emperor. So they beguile the Court \vith feigned
service, and maintain a false appearance of amity with Jmna.
    In thus stimulating to action (you) the (J apanese) authorities
of Imna, it is my desire that before they have annexed Imna,
 and \vhile they still maintain a feigned appearance of submis-
 siveness, you should now seize the opportunity of their being
 unprepared, and raising all your forces conquer them. The
  Imperial decree urging us to establish South Kara and Tbk-
  k\vi-than does not date merely from a few tens of ~years ago, and
 yet Silla has not once listened to this order, as is well known
 to you. N ow, can anything be better than, in respectful faith
  in the Emperor, to endeavour to establish Imna? I fear,
  however, lest you, too readily trusting to blandishing speeches
  and lightly accepting false statelnents, may cause the ruin of
  the land of Imna and bring dishonour on the Emperor. Be XIX. 14.
  warned against this, and do not be deceived by others."
     3rd year,t Autumn, 7th month. Pekche sent Ki no Omi A.D. 54 2 •
   Nasol ~limasa and Kwi ..nybn, Nasol of the middle division
  to come and report to the Emperor on the administration of
   Jmna in Lo\ver Kara,2 and to present at the same time a
   memoria!
     4th year, Summer, 4th month. Ki no Omi, ~asol Mimasa 3 A.D. 543.
   of Pekche and the rest took their departure.
     Autumn, 9th month. King Sybng-myong of Pekche sent

   1   "Third year" is not in the ori~inal. The" Shiikai" inserts it, no doubt
 rightly.
    :? r n·    The interlinear Kana has Arushi Kara Kuni. Arushi is meant
 for the Corean \vord arc, "belo\\',"
    :J Ki no Omi \vas a Japanese v.,ith a Corean title. See above, p. 44.
        J26                           NIHONGI.

          Chin-mn Kwi-mun, Nasal of the Former Division, the Hotok
          Kwi-chu Kwi-nu and Makamu, Sitok of the Mononobe, with a
          present of Punam 1 products and two slaves.
            Winter, 11th month, 8th day. Tsumori no Muraji was sent
          to Pekche with a message from the Emperor to the following
         effect :-" Let the Pekche prefects and governors of castles
         resident in that part of Lower Kara which belongs to Imna be
         joined to the Japanese jurisdiction." He also bore an Imperial
         decree, which commanded as follows : -
            "For more than ten years past you have presented memorials
         saying that Imna should be established. But notwithstanding
         these representations the matter still remains unaccomplished.
         Now Imna is the roof-tree of your country. If the roof-tree is
         broken, who shall erect a house with it? Our reflections rest
XIX. 15. in this. You ought speedily to establish Imna. If you establish
         Imna speedily, it is necessary to say that Kahachi no Atahe 2
         and his followers will of their own accord retire."
            On this day King Syong-myong, having heard the Imperial
         decree, asked the opinion in succession of his three Chief
         Ministers, his Treasurer, and his high officials, saying :-" The
         Imperial edict runs so: What is now to be done?" The
         three Chief Ministers and the rest answered and said :-" Our
         prefects and governors of castles in Lower Kara should not
         leave our jurisdiction. As to establishing the country (of Imna),
         the Imperial decree should be at once complied with."
            12th month. King Syong-myong of Pekche again published
         the former Imperial decree to all his officials, saying :-" The
         Emperor's decree is to this effect. Now what is next to be
         done?" The senior Minister Sa-chhek-kwi-nu, the middle
         Minister Mok-hyop-ma-na, the junior Minister Mok-yun-kwi,
         the Tok-sol Pi-ri-mak-ko, the Tok··sol Tong-syong-to-thyon,
         the Tok-sol MOk-hyop-me-syun, the Tok-sol Kuk-syu-ta and
         the Na-sol Yon-pi-chyon-na counselled alike, saying :-" Thy
         servants are by nature stupid, and have no good scheme at all to
         propose. It is best to carry out the Imperial instructions for
         the establishment of Irona. Thou shouldst no,v summon the
          1 Described as Nalnban, or southern     barbarians, i.e. the Malay
        Archipelago.
          4) See above, XIX. 10. He was the Japanese authority of Ara who \vas
        intriguing with Silla.
                             KIM~IEI.                    49
agents of Jmna and the Kanki of the various provinces, and
concert along with them a common policy, which should be
laid before the Emperor in proof of thy good intentions.
Kahachi no Atahe, Yanasa and Mato are still resident in Ara-
Imna, and (while this is so) it is to be feared that it will be hard
to establish it. Add therefore a further memorial, praying that
they may be removed to their original place."
    King Syong-myong said :-" Your advice, my Ministers, is
 thoroughly in accordance with my feelings."
    Accordingly, in this month he sent the Si-tok, Ko-pun to
summon the Agent of Imna and the Agent of the Japanese
 authority. They both answered and said :-" When New XIX. 16.
 Year's Day has passed, we will go and hear (what the King of
 Pekche has to say)."
    5th year, Spring, 1st month. The Land of Pekche sent A.D. 544·
 messengers to surnmon the Agents of Jmna and of the
 Japanese authorities. They both answered and said :-" The
 season has come for worshipping the Gods: when the festival is
 over we will go."
    This month Pekche sent messengers a second time to
 summon the Agents of Jmna and of the Japanese authorities.
 Neither the Japanese authorities nor Imna sent their Agents,
 but sent mean persons, so that Pekche was unable to concert
 with them measures for the establishment of Imna.
    2nd month. Pekche sent the Si-tok, Ma-mu, the Si-tok Ko-
 pun-ok and the Si-tok, Sa-na-no-chha-chyu to Irona with the
 following message to the Japanese authorities and the Kanki of
 Imna :-" I sent Ki no Omi, the Nasal, Mi-ma-sa,' the Nasal,
 Kwi-nyon, and Mononobe no Muraji, the Nasal, Yong-ka-ta,
  to have an audience of the Emperor. Mi-ma-sa and his
 colleagues returned from Japan with a decree which declared
 as follows :-' Do ye, in concert with the Japanese authorities
 residing there, speedily prepare a good plan such as may meet
 our wishes. See that you are vigilant, and be not imposed
 upon by the wiles of others.'
    Moreover Tsumori no [the 'Original Pekche Record'
 has 'Tsumori no Muraji Kwi-ma-nu-kwe.' There is here
 a corruption, and the name cannot be made clearJ Muraji,

                1   Ki no Olni was the Nasol Mirnasa.
        5°                               NIHONGI.

         when he returned from Japan, communicated an Imperial
         message, and inquired respecting the administration of
         Irona. I therefore desired, in concert with the Japanese
         authorities and the Imna Agents, to come to a decision
         regarding the government of Imna, which I might report
         to the Emperor. I sent for them three times, but until
         now they have not arrived. For this reason I have been
         unable to discuss with you a plan for the government of Jmna,
         and make my report to the Emperor. It is now my intention
         to invite Tsumori no Mllraji to remain, and by another quick
         messenger to send the Emperor a full report of the condition
         of affairs. This messenger will be despatched to Japan on the
XIX. 17· loth of the 3rd month. On his arrival the Emperor will
         undoubtedly ask questions about you. I would therefore
         recommend you, the chief Japanese authority and the Kanki of
         Imna, each to despatch messengers in company with my
         messenger to go and receive such commands as the Emperor
         may give."
            Pekche separatel~y addressed Kahachi no Atahe [the
         " Original Pekche Record" has Kahachi no Atahe Inasamato.
         There is here a corruption, and the correct name unclear],     is
         saying :-" From former times until now I have heard of
         nothing but thy misdeeds. Thy ancestors [the 'Original
         Pekche Record' has, ' Th~y predecessor Na-han-tha-kap-pe-ka-
         nap·chik-kl-kap-pe, other\\tise called Na-ka-tha-kap-pe-eung-ka-
         ki-mi.' I This is a corruption and not clear] have all fostered
         wicked lies, and, led a\vay by \Vi-ka-ka Kimi, have placed
         implicit faith in his statements. [The Pekche 'Original
         Record' has, 'Wi-ka Kimi's personal name ,vas Yupiki.']
         Without sorrow for thy country's disasters or regard for my
         wishes they recklessl~y indulged in violence and oppression.
         Expelled on this account, thou and thy people came to reside
         in Imna, where tllOU hast constantly preached evil. The dail~y
         increasing ruin of Imna is due to thee. Although but an
         insignificant person, thou art like the small fire which burns up
         the hills and tTIoors, and extends to the villages and hamlets.
         Owing to thy evil deeds, ruin is impending over Jmna, with
         the result that eventuall~y the Miyake of the various provinces

                    1   Kimi is probably the Japanese \vord for Ie lord."
                         KI~1~IEI .                    J26

west of the sea will become unable permanently to render
service to the Emperor. I am now sending an address to the
Emperor praying that he may remove thee and thy people,
and send thee back to thy former place. Thou also wilt go
and hear (the Emperor's decision).>'
    Further, addressing the chief Japanese authority of 1m na
and the Kanki of Imna, he said :-" In regard to the matter of
establishing Imna, how could anyone do so without borro\ving
the Emperor's power? It was therefore my intention to apply
to the Emperor and request of him an army \vith which to
succour the Land of Imna. The provisions for this army
would be supplied by me. Whilst the number of the troops
\\tas still undecided, it was naturally impossible to make any·
fixed arrangements for the transport of provisions. I twas
therefore my request that we should meet and consider
together what "vas best to be done, and having selected the
most advantageous course, to report to the Emperor accord- XIX. 18.
ingly. Therefore I sent repeated summonses to ~you, but since
you steadily refused to come, it was impossible to advise with
you."
    The chief Japanese authority answered and said :-" The
reason why the Imna Agent did not go in compliance with thy
summons was because I would not allow him to do so. \Vhen
I sent a report to the Emperor, the return messenger brought
the following instructions from His Majesty :-' We are about
to send Ika no Omi [corrupt-not clear] to Silla and Tsumori no
Muraji to Pekche. Do thou await the Imperial message which
they will bring, and meanwhile refrain from taking the trouble of
going to Silla or pekche.' Such \vere the Imperial instructions.
When I heard of Ika no Omi's embassy to Silla, I sent after
him to inquire the Emperor's message.        He said, 'Let the
Japanese Omi and the Agent of Imna proceed to Silla, and
apply to Silla to receive communication of the Emperor's
orders.' Nothing was said about going to Pekche to learn his
commands" Afterwards Tsumori no Muraji eventually arrived,
and when passing through this place, mentioned this subject,
and said, ' My present mission to Pekche is for the purpose of
getting rid of the Pekche prefects and governors of castles
resident in Lower Kara. I have only heard of this question,
and know nothing of any instructions to Imna and the
         J26                           NIHONGI.

         Japanese authorities to meet Pekche, In order to hear the
         Emperor's commands.' This is why we have not gone, and
         Jmna is not responsible."
            Hereupon the Kanki of Jmna said :-" In accordance with
         the summons of thy messenger, it was our desire to proceed (to
         pekche). But the chief Japanese authority would not allow us
         to be despatched, and that was why we did not do so. As
         for the instructions which the Great King, prompted by his feel-
         ings, has addressed to us, with the object of establishing Imna,
         it is impossible for us adequately to express our joy at seeing
         them."
            3rd month. Pekche sent the Nasol, A-mang-teung-mun,
         Kama, the Nasol of Ho-sye,l and Kapi, the Nasol of Mono-
         nobe, to present a memorial to the Emperor, as follows : -
            "The Nasal, Mi-ma-sa, the Nasol, Kwi-nyon, and their col-
         leagues came to thy servant's frontier state bearing an Imperial
         decree, which said :-' You should concert a good plan along
         with the Japanese authorities resident there, and speedily estab-
         lish Imna. Be on your guard, and do not allow yourselves to
         be deceived by others.' Moreover Tsumori no Muraji and his
         colleagues came to thy servant's frontier state, bearing an
         Imperial message in \vhich inquiry was made as to the estab-
XIX. 19. lishment of Imna. I received the Imperial command with
         reverence, and without presuming to delay, desired to concert
         measures along with them. I therefore sent messengers to
         summon the Japanese authorities [the Pekche 'Original Re-
         cord' has, ' Sent to summon 'Vi-ho-phi no Omi.' This is, per-
         haps, Iku-ba no Omi] and Imna. They all answered and said:
         - ' The new year has come. Please let it pass, and then we will
         go.' A long time elapsed, and yet they did not arrive. I again
         sent messengers to summon them. They all answered and
         said :-' The festival time has come. Please let it pass, and
         then we ,viIi go.' A long time elapsed, and yet they did not
         arrive. I again sent messengers to summon them. But inas-
         much as they sent mean men, it was inlpossible to concert plans.
         Now Imna's failure to come in answer to my summons was not
          1 This luay be Japanese, in which case Kose is the pronunciation.

        Mononobe is Japanese. The frequency with ""hich Japanese names occur in
        lhe nanles of Pekche officials is significant of the influence exercised by
        Japan in the peninsula at this period.
                               KIMMEl.                            53
their own idea, it was the work of the unprincipled sycophancy
of Ahyon- Ya-na-sa and Cha-ro-ma-to [two men's names: they
have already occurred above 1]. Now Imna treats Ara as an
elder brother. and simply follows its wishes, ,vhile the people of
Ara regard the Japanese authority as Heaven, and are implicitly
guided by its wishes. [The Pekche 'Original Record' has,
, Treats Ara as a father, and regards the Japanese authority as
the origin.] Now Ikuba no ami, Kibi no Olni. and Kahachi
no Atahe are all simply at the beck and nod of Yanasa and
Mato. Yanasa and Mato are only mean persons of no family,
yet they exercise absolute authority' over the Japanese adminis-
tration. Moreover they restrain Imna and prevent it froln
sending envoys. For these reasons I ,vas unable to concert
 measures with them and make ans\ver to Your Majesty. I
therefore detained Kwi-ma-nu-ki [probably Tsumori no Muraji~
and sent another messenger, swift as a flying bird, with this
report to Your Majesty. But if you allowed those two men
[Yanasa and Mato ~ to remain in Ara, they \\"ould carryon
their manifold intrigues, making it impossible for Imna to be
established, and assuredly preventing the states west of the sea
from doing their service. It was my humble petition that these
two men might be removed and sent home, and that you should
 take measures for the establishment of Imna by instructions to
 the Japanese authorities and to Imna. Therefore thy servants
 sent the Nasal, Mimasa and the Nasol, Kwinyon along with XIX. 20.
 Kvvi-ma-nu-ki to present this memorial and to hear Your
 Majesty's answer. Hereupon Your Majesty gave command,
 saying :-' It was not by our wishes that Ikuba no Omi and the
 others [by the others are meant Kibi, Otokimi no Omi and
 Kahachi no Atahe] ,vent to Silla. Formerly, when In-chi-mi
  [not clear] and the Kanki of Aro were in office, that countr~y
 was harassed by Silla, and the people were unable to attend
 to their husbandry. Pekche is so far distant that it ,vas unable
 to help them in their need. Ikuba no Omi and the others there-
 fore went to Silla, and just obtained leave for them to plough
 and sow. Is it necessary to repeat what We have already told
 thee, viz., that if Imna is established, Yanasa and Mato will
 withdraw of their own accord.'
  1 See above, p. 54.   They are intended for Japanese names, but I do
 not recognize thenl.
         54                            NIHONGI.

            I received Your Majesty's Commands \vith humility. ] oy
         and dread mingled in my bosom. Silla, however, was deceiving
         the Imperial Court, and knew how to set at naught the Imperial
         Commands. In spring, Silla seized Chhak-syun, and having
         expelled my guards of 1fount Kunye, at length kept possession
         of it. The part bordering on Ara was cultivated by Ara; the
         part bordering on Mount Kunye was cultivated by Silla. Each
         cultivated for themselves, and there was no mutual encroach..
         mente But Yanasa and Mato passed over and cultivated
         the territory of others. In the sixth month they ran away to
         Inchimi. Afterwards, when Rose no Omi came ~the Pekche
         , Original Record' has, 'After I detained Inchimi, when Kose
         no Omi came.' All this is not clear~, Silla ceased to encroach
         on and harass the territory of others, and there were no com-
         plaints from Ara of being unable to attend to husbandry o\ving
         to the harassments of Silla. Thy servant was formerly told
         that Silla, every spring and autumn, assembled troops in large
XIX. 21. numbers with the object of invading Ara and Hasan,l or as
         some say, to invade Kara. Lately I received a letter, in conse-
         quence of which I sent troops for the protection of Imna. This
         shows that there has been no negligence. I repeatedl~y des-
         patched resolute soldiers to their help when occasion demanded,
         and it was owing to this that the Imna people \vere able to
         carryon their agricultural operations in due season, and that
         Silla did not dare to molest them. Yet it was reported to Your
         Majesty that Pekche was so far distant that it was unable to
         help them in their need, and, therefore, Ikuba no Onli and the
         others went to Silla, and just obtained leave for them to plough
         and sow. This is deceiving the Celestial Court above, and
         multiplying V\,icked intrigues. The deception is here plain
         enough. There must be manyother cases besides oflying in order
         to deGeive the Celestial Court. So long as Ikuba no Omi resides
         in Ara I fear it will be impossible to establish tIle land of Imna.
         He ought speedily to be removed. This state of things is
         viewed by thy servant with profound apprehension. Cha-ro-
         rna-to, although the son of a Corean mother, holds the position
         of Ohomuraji and takes precedence among the Agents of Japan,
         entering the ranks of the lIable and honourable. And yet he
           1 11iJl1J. The interlinear Kana reading is N omure, where Inure is for
         the Corean Inoi, 111ountain.
                             KI~I~IEI.                            55
now wears the cap of the Silla official rank of Namanye, 1
from which it may be readily seen that he is devoted to that
country body and soul. \Vhen his conduct is maturely ob-
served, there is no sign at all of a\ve or dread. Therefore I
formerly reported to Your Majesty his evil deeds, setting them
out fully for your information. No\v he still \years a foreign
dress and daily goes to the Silla borders, journeying back
and forward publicly or privately without any fear \\rhatever.
The downfall of the T6k 2 country was o\ving to no other cause
than this. Hamphi, Kanki of the Tok country, was false to the XIX 22.
Land of Kara, and had a secret understanding \vith Silla, so
that Kara fought from without. Hence its (Tok~s) do\vnfall.
N ow supposing that the Kanki, Hamphi had been prevented
from entering into a secret understanding \vith Silla, the T()k
country, small as it is, would certainly not have come to ruin.
In regard to Chhiik-syun again, the case is the same. If the
Ruler of Chhak-syun had been prevented from holding secret
understandings with Silla, and inviting aggression, \vould this
State have come to destruction? \Vhen I consider one after
another the disasters of the downfall of these various provinces,
all are owing to men with secret understandings and double
hearts. Now Mato and the others are on terms of great
intimacy with Silla. They have at last put on their dress, and
frequent Silla morning and evening, secretly preparing treason.
I fear, therefore, that Imna \viII, on this account, come to per-
manent ruin. If Imna is ruined, thy servant's country stands
alone and exposed to danger, and though I am desirous of
continuing my allegiance, hovv will this be possible? I t is
my humble prayer that Your Majesty, in the exercise of your
profound reflection and distant foresight, \vill promptly remove
them to their former place and thus give peace to Imna."
   "Tinter, loth month. The Pekche envoys, the N asol,
Teung-mun, the Nasal, Kama, and the rest took their
departure.
        The Pekche "Original Record" has," Winter, loth
     month! The Nasol, Yeung-mun and the Nasol, Kama
     returned from Japan. They said there was no Imperial
  1 Nama \\'as a Silla official rank.
  2 The Tok country is doubtless the saIne as Tok-kwi-than frequently
earned above, e~g. X\TI1. 18.
        J26                              NIHONGI.

              reply in respect to the matter of Kahachi no Atahe, Yanasa
              and Mato, which they had represented to the Emperor.
            11th month. Pekche sent messengers to summon the Omi
         of the Japanese Residency and the Agents of Imna, saying:-
         "The Nasal Teung-mun, Kama, the Nasal of Kose, and Kapi,.
         the Mononobe Nasol, whon1 I sent on a mission to the
         Emperor's Court, have returned from Japan. N ow let the chief
         Japanese authority, with the Agents of the Land of Imna, come
         and hear the Emperor's orders, and let us consult together
         respecting Imna." Accordingly, Kibi no Omi, the chief
         Japanese authority, the lower Kanki of Ara, the Te-pu-son
         Ku-chhyu-yu-ni, the Syong-syu-wi 1 of Kara, named Ko-chyon-
         hye, the Lord of Sol-rna, the Lord of Sa-i-ki, the son of the
         Lord of San-pan-hye, the I-syu-wi 2 of Tara, named Heul-kon-
XIX. 23· chi, the Kanki of Cha-tha, and the Kanki of Ku-chha 3 pro-
         ceeded to Pekche. Herel1pon, King Syong-myong of Pekche
         notified to them the general purport of the Emperor's decree,
         saying :-" I sent the Nasal, Mimasa, the Nasol, Kwi-nyon,
         and the N asol, Yong-ka-ta to the Court of Japan, upon which
         the Emperor gave command that Imna was to be speedily
         established. Moreover, Tsumori no Muraji, by the Emperor's
         order, inquired what was to be done with Imna. I have,
         therefore, sent for you, and I beg of you each to give your
         advice as to the best further means of establishing Imna."
          Kibi no Omi and the Kanki 4 of Imna said :-" The establish-
         ment of the land of Imna rests simply with the Great King.
         It is our desire and hope, in obedience to Your Majesty,· to
         join in making a representation to the Emperor and hearing
         his instructions." To this King Syong-myong said :-" The
         land of Imna has, from of old time, bound itself to be to our
          Pekche as a son or younger brother. 6 Now, Inchimi, of the
         Japanese Miyake [the name of the Japanese Omi resident in
          Imna], has already smitten 7 Silla, and is now preparing to

          1 This Ineans Upper-head-rank, and is probably a Corean title.
          2 Second-head-rank, probably a title.
          3 Called Ko-chha below, year 23 of this reign.

          4 This terlU apparently includes all the personages above described.

          I)   :Eo.
          e This phrase is used loosely for" a dependant."
          '1   The" Shukai " thinks we should read for" slnitten," ~'conspired with.'
                                KIMl\IEI.                                 57
send an expedition against me. This, again, is a result of his
fondness for listening to Silla's empty boasts and vaunting
language. Now the object of sending Inchimi 1 to Imna was
never that it should be in'vaded and destro~yed [not clear J.
From old time until now Siila has been without principle,
eating its words and breaking its faith. In this way it has
brought our faithful ally, the Land of Chhiik-syun, to ruin.
I hope to have the satisfaction of making it repent it, and I
have therefore sent for you. Let us all take to heart the
Emperor's gracious message. It is my hope and desire that
the Land of Imna may thus be set up and continued as in XIX. 24.
former days, and that we may long be brethren. I have been
informed that on the frontier between the two countries of
Silla and Ara there is a great river,: which makes it easily
defensible. I intend to take advantage of this to construct
six fortresses along it, and humbly to petition the Emperor for
3000 troops-sao for each fortress.      Adding to these rn)' o\vn
soldiers, we shall make it impossible (for the Silla people) to
cultivate the rice-fields. By harassing them in this way, it is
 to be hoped that the five fortresses of Mount Kunye will fling
 down their arms and surrender of their own accord, while the
 Land of Chhiik-syun will be restored again. For the troops
 which I shall request of the Emperor, I will provide clotlling
 and food. This is the first part of the plan which I wish to
 submit to the Emperor.
   Moreover, in respect to the stationing of prefects and
 governors of castles in South Kara 1 is it that I wish to oppose
 the Emperor, and cut off the channel of paying tribute? I
 only hope to render effective aid against manifold disaster, and
 to overthrow a powerful enemy. But who is there who does
 not contrive to attach· himself to these bands of violent men?
 The Northern 3 enemy is great and strong, and my country is
 small and weak. If I did not station in South Kara prefects
 and governors of castles for its government and protection, it
 could not be defended against such a powerful foe, and it would

  1 Probably lsumi was his nanle.          The interlinear Kana gives this
rendering.
  2 The Naktong gang.

  3 Koryo is lneant.    The old reading for " northern" is "this," the Chinese
characters for these t\\'O words strongly resembling each other.
        58                            N IIION(;r.
         also be impossible therewith to restrain Silla. I therefore
         propose to retain them in their stations for the harassment of
         Silla, and the preservation of In1na. If this be not done, I fear
XIX. 25. that I shall come to ruin and be unable to render allegiance to
         the Emperor. This is the second part of the scheme which I
         wish to submit to the Emperor.
            Moreover, the Emperor may decree the establishment of
         III1na, but so long as Kibi no Omi, Kahachi no Atahe, Yanasa,
         and Mato continue to reside in Imna, he will be unable to do
         so. I shall therefore request that these four men be each sent
         back to their respective homes. This is the third part of the
         plan which I wish to submit to the Emperor.
            Let us all togetller, you the Omi of the Japanese Miyake,
         you the Kanki of Imna, and myself, despatch envoys with a
         joint message to His Majes(y, praying to hear his gracious
         instructions."
            Hereupon Kibi no Omi and the I(anki said :-" The triple
         scheme propounded by the Great I{ing" is entirely in accord-
         ance with our humble sentiments. We pray that we may be
         allowed to return and respectfully advise with the Oho-ami 1
          [meaning the Oho-omi of the Japanese Administration in
         ImnaJ of the Japanese Administration, the King of Ara, the
         King of Kara, as to their all sending envoys with a joint message
         to the Emperor. This is truly an occasion such as only comes
         once in a thousand years. Ought it not to be profoundly
         considered and maturely planned? "
            12th month. The following report 2 was received from the
         province of Koshi :-" At Cape Minabe, on the northern side of
XIX. 26. the Island of Sarlo, there arrived men of Su-shen 3 in a boat,
         and staid there. During the spring and summer they caught
         fish, which they used for food. The men of that island said
         they were not human beings. They also called them devils,
         and did not dare to go near them. The people of the village of
          Dmu, on the east of the island, having gathered acorns,4 were
          1 The Omi was therefore only a subordinate officer.
          2 Apparently made by the provincial recorders \\1hose appointtnent is
        noted above, p. 307 of Vol. I.
          3 "An old nante for thetx. 'II,   Tungusic ancestors of the Manchus."-
        Giles. The interlinear Kana has Mishi-hase or Mishl-111USe or Mishimu-
        mase.
          4 The fruit of the shit, or Quercus Cuspidata.
                                 KIM~IEI.                                 59
preparing to cook them for eating, and having covered them
over \vith ashes, \vere roasting them, \vhen the shells turned
into t,vo men, \vhich hovered over the fire at a distance of more
than a foot. After a time they fought together, to the great
wonder of the villagers. They took them and placed them in
the courtyard, when they flew as before, and \vent on fighting.
A certain man divined from this, saying :-' \Ve shall assuredly
be enchanted by devils.' Not long after, as he had said, they
\vere plundered by them: Thereupon the men of Su-shen
removed to Segaha Bay. The God of this bay is a dreadful
God, and no one dares to approach him. Half of those who
drink of that water \vhen thirsty die, and their bones are piled
up on the rocky steeps. The common people call this God
~lishihase 2 no Kuma."
   6th year, Spring, 3rd month. Hasuhi, Kashihade no Omi, A.D. 545.
,vas sent on a mission to Pekche.
   Sumrrler, 5th month. Pekche sent the Nasol, Ki-neung,:l
the Nasol, Yong-ka-ta, and the Sit6k, Chha-chyu ,vith a
nlemorial to the Emperor.
   Autun1n, 9th rnonth. Pekche sent Po-che/ Ho-t()k of the
Middle Division, and others to Imna with a present of valuable
products of \V u for the Omi of the Japanese Government
there, and for all the !(anki, each in proportion to his rank.
  This month Pekche made an image of Buddha sixteen feet XIX. 27·
high/ and drew up a written prayer, saying :-" I understand
that it is extremely meritorious to n1ake a Buddha sixteen feet
high. By the merit which I have now acquired in reverentially
-constructing one, I pray that the Emperor may obtain exceed-

  1   Apparently by the !\lanchus.
  2   Mishihase is the Japanese rendering of Su-shen. Kuma nleans bear.
   :i Perhaps identical "'ith the Kwi-nyon tnentioned above.

   4 Written '\"ith the same characters as are used for the Sanskrit Bodhi,

wisdoln.
   5 The " Shukai J)  quotes from a Chinese author :-" Ming Ti, an Emperor
·of the Later Han Dynasty, sa\\' in a dreanl a man of gold of great stature
""ith a nimbus round his head. One of his Ministers explained that there
",vas a God in the western quarter \vhose name was Buddha. He was sixteen
feet high and of a yello\\T golden colour. Upon this the Emperor sent to
 India to nlake inquiries respecting the Buddhist doctrine, \vhich resulted in
paintings (of Buddha) being Inade in China." NUlnerous other cases are
found of Buddhas of this height.
        60                           NIHONGI.

         ing virtue, and that all the land of the Miyake 1 belonging to
         the Emperor may receive blessings. I also pray for the moral
         enfranchisement ~ of all living creatures under Heaven. There-
         fore I have made this image."
            Winter, 11th month. Hasuhi, Kashihade no Omi, returned
         from Pekche, and said :-" Thy servant, when sent on his
         mission, departed with all his family, and arrived at the shore
          [shore means the seashore] of Pekche. The sun went down
         and we took lodging for the night. One of my children
         suddenly disappeared, and we could not tell where he had gone
         to. That night there was a great fall of snow, and we could
         not search for him until morning. Then we found the footprints
         of a tiger in a row one after another. Thy servant accordingly,
         having girded on his sword and put on his armour, went out in
         search. Coming to a cliff, he drew his sword, and said :-' I,
         having respectfully taken charge of the silken threads and
XIX. 28. cords,i' with weary toil by land and sea, my hair combed by
         the wind, my bath the rain, with the grass for my filat and
         thorns for my carpet, came hither, all because I loved my child,
         and wished to make him succeed to his father's office. Thou
         (too), 0 Dread Deity! hast parental love as one feature of thy
         character. Now to-night my child disappeared. Following
         up his traces, I sought for him as far as this place, and without
         fear of losing my life I intend to have my revenge. For this I
         have come. Upon this that tiger advanced before me and
         opened his n10uth in order to devour me. But I, Hasuhi,
         swiftly stretched out my left hand and seized that tiger by the
         tongue, while with my right I stabbed it to death. Then I
         stripped off its skin and returned with it.' "
            This year Koryo was greatly troubled by civil disturbances,.
         and large numbers of people suffered execution.
                 The "Pekche Original Record" says :-" 12th month,
              20th day. The Sye faction and the Chhu faction of the
              Land of Koryo fought at the King's Court with beat of
              drum. The Sye party were beaten, but did not disband
              their troops. On the third day, all the Sye party's
              children and grandchildren were taken and put to death~
          1 i.e. the Japanese territory in Corea.
          2 Vimokcha. See Eitel's" Handbook of Buddhism," 2nd edition, p 201.
          3 i.e. the Emperor's ll1issive.
                                K[t\I~IEI.                             61

     On the 24th, King Hyang-kang, of the land of Koma,l
     died."
   7th year, Spring, 1St month, 3rd day. The envoys from A.D. 546.
Pekche, Kwi-n)TOn, Nasal of the Middle Division, and his
companions took their departure. They received a present
of seventy-four good 2 horses and ten ships.
   Summer, 6th month, 12th day. Pekche sent Nyang-Y()p-
nye, Nasol of the Middle Division, and others, to present
tribute.
   Autumn, 7th month. A report was received from the
district of Imaki in the province of Yamato, saying :-" In the
spring of the 5th year (of the reign), Miya [this is a personal
name], Kahara Tami no Atahe, went up to an upper story to XIX. 29.
view the prospect. He saw a good horse, bred from the
mares which carry the food for the Emperor's table sent by
the fishermen of the Land of Kil. When it saw a shadow it
neighed loudly: it nimbly sprang over its mother's back. He
approached and bought it. He ~ept it for several years.
When it grew up, its action was like that of the startled wild
goose or the soaring dragon. It differed from the flock and
excelled the crowd. It was obedient to control, and its paces
were in due proportion. 3 It leaped over the ravine at the
Hill of Ohochi, which is eighteen rods" in width. Miya,
Kahara Tami no Atahe, is a man of the village of Hinokuma."
   This year Koryi) was greatly disturbed: more than 2000
people were killed in battle.
        The " Pekche Original Record" has :-" Koryi) on the
     3rd day of the 1st month established as king the son of
     the second queen. He was eight years of age. The King
     of Koma 1) had three wives. The true queen had no
     children, and the heir to the throne \\ras the son of the
     second consort, whose father's family was of the Chhu
     faction. The junior wife had also a child. Her father's
     family was of the Sye faction. When the King of Kama

  1 \Vritten ~a.     Koryo is mep,nt. A king of Koryo named Anwon died in
this year, according to the" Tongkam." The interlinear Kana has H N'uta,;'
which I can Inake nothing of.
   2 i.e. broken in.             :~ i.e. it had a good mouth and easy paces
   4 The rod is usually of ten feet.

   :j The Chinese character is 1", as before.     See above.
  VOL. II.                                                       F
        62                              NIHONGI.

                took ill, the Sye faction and the Chhu faction each tried
               to set up the son of the respective consorts. The result
               was that of the Sye faction more than two thousand men
               were slain."
A.D. 54i.    8th year, Spring, 4th month. Pekche sent Chin-mo-syon-
           mun, Tok-sol of the Former Division, th'e NasoI, Kama and
          others to ask for auxiliaries, and offered (as hostage) Won,
          son of Tong-syong, (Nasol?) of the Lower Division, ex-
           changing him for the ~6k-sol, Mun-hyu-ma-na.
A.D. 548.
XIX. 30.
             9th year, Spring, Ist month, 3rd day. The Pekche
          ambassador, Chin-mo-syon-mun, T6k-sol of the Former
           Division, and his colleagues, asked leave to depart. Accord-
          ingl)' an Imperial command was given, saying :-" In regard
          to the auxiliaries asked for by you, help will be assuredly sent
          you. Hasten to carry back this answer to your king."
             Summer, 4th month, 3rd day. Pekche sent the Han-sol
          of the Middle Division, Nyang Yop-nye and others with a
          message to the Emperor, saying :-" The Tok-sol, Syon-
          mun and his colleagues have arrived at thy servant's frontier
          state with an Imperial message, informing me that the auxi-
          liary force which I asked for would be sent when occasion
          demanded. I have humbly received this gracious pronounce-
          ment, and my joy is unbounded. Now, a prisoner taken in
          the expedition of the Castle of Ma-chin erst month, 3rd day.
          Koryo led an army and laid siege to the Castle of Ma..chin] 1
          has reported thus :-' It was on the invitation and at the
          instigation of the Land of Ara and of the Japanese authorities
          (in Corea) that this expedition against Pekche was undertaken.'
          Judging from the facts, this appears likely. I wished,
          however, to examine thoroughly this statement, and
          three times sent to summon them. But neither of them
          came, and I am therefore profoundly anxious. I humbly
          pra:y the August Emperor [the western frontier states all
          style the Emperor of Japan the August (lit. to be feared)
          Emperor] first to consider this, and for the time being to

           1 The "Tongkanl" mentions an invasion of Pekche by Koryo in this

        year. Karyn was driven back lvith great loss by the help of an auxiliary
        force from Silla. The last statenlent sounds rather strange in vie\v of the
        relations of Pekche and Silla described in the above pages.
                                   KIl\L\IEI.                              J26

delay the auxiliaries I which I asked for until thy servant sends
an answer."
   The Emperor's command was as follo\vs :-" We have
listened attentively to thy representation. When \ve consider
what thou dost complain of, \ve, too, are vexed that the
Japanese authorities and Ara should not have come to the
assistance of a neighbour in his difficulty. But it is incredible
that the)' should have gone so far as to send a secret message
to Koryo. If we had ordered it so, of course they ~rould have
sent one, but in the absence of any order from us, how could
they find it possible to do so? I beg that the king, loosing
his collar and slackening his girdle, will possess his soul in
peace and avoid profound suspicions and fears. In accord- XIX. 3 10
ance with our former instructions, let him join forces ,vith
Imna, and let them together each defend the territory \vhich
they hold in fee against the northern enemy.2
   We are about to send a number of men to re-people the
territory of Ara, left vacant by the fugitives."
   6th month, 3rd day. An envoy ,vas sent to Pekche with an
Imperial message, saying :-" What is the news since the
Tok-sol, Syon-mun took his departure? \Ve are informed
that th~y country has suffered frorn the Kon1a brigands. It
\vould be well earnestly to take measures in concert with
Imna, and defend yourselves as heretofore."
   Intercalary 7th month. 12th day. Nyang-Yop-nye, the
Pekche envoy, and his colleagues took their departure.
   Winter, loth month, Three hundred and seventy men were
sent to Pekche to assist in constructing a fortress 3 at Tok-i-sin.
   loth year, 6th month, 7th day. The Syang-tok, Mun-kwi A.D. 549..
and the Ko-tok, Ma-chha-mun asked permission to take their
departure. Accordingl~y the Emperor commanded, saying:-
" \Ve are about to send to inquire into the truth of the state-
ment that Yanasa and Mato have been privately sending
emissaries to Kory(). The army asked for will be counter-
manded as requested."

   1 If, as the "Tongkam~' states, an invasion of Pekche by Koryn had

been repulsed by the help of Silla auxiliaries, there ,vas a still better reason
\vhy Pekche should no longer require a Japanese force for operations
against Silla.
  ~ Koryo.                        ;~ Or fortresses.
              J26                           NIHONGI.

A.D.   550. 11th year, Spring, 2nd month, loth day. An envoy was
         sent with an Imperial message to Pekche [the "Pekche
         Original Record" says: - "3rd month, 12th day. The
         Japanese Ambassador Apita, with three ships, arrived at the
         capital "], saying :-" With regard to the purport of the memorial
         presented by the Syang-tok, Mun-k\vi and the Ko-tok, Ma-chha-
         mun, We have given instructions on each point, so that it is as
         plain as looking at something on the palm of one's hand. It is
         Our desire that you should take them thoroughly to heart, and
         we hope, moreover, that you will give them your whole attention,
         so that after the envoy's return all may be with you the same
         as usual. It is Our present wish merely to make plain Our
         answer, and therefore We send a messenger to you.
XIX. 32.    Moreover, We are informed that you have a trusty Minister,
         the Nasol, Ma-mu, who serves as a channel of communi-
         cation between you _and your people, and who, being a man
         after Your 1fajesty's heart, acts as your assistant. If you wish
         that your State should be undisturbed, that it should perma-
         nently occupy the position of a Miyake, and long continue to
         serve the Emperor, all that is necessary is that Ma-mu be
         appointed your chief Envoy to Our Court.'
            The Emperor made a further decree, saying: - "We are
         informed that your enemies of the North commit outrages,
         and we therefore send you thirty sets 1 of arrows, which we
         hope will serve fer the defence of one place.'
            Summer, 4th month, 1st day. The Japanese representative'
         resident in Pekche being on the point of leaving [the
         " Pekche Original Record " says :-" 4th month, 1st day. The
         Japanese Apita went away"], King Syong-myong, of Pekche,
         addressed him, saying :-" As to the matter of Jmna, it shall
         be vigorously defended, in accordance with the Imperial in-
         structions; as to Yanasa and Mato, whether they are to be
         called to an account or not, I shall simply obey the Imperial
                     H
         orders.     He accordingly sent a present of six Koryo slaves for
         the Emperor, and to his representative he gave a separate gift of
         one slave. [All these were slaves captured at the siege of Irim.]
            16th day. Pekche sent Phi-ku-keun, Nasal of the Middle
                1 According to the" Yengishiki" a set of arro\vs \vas sometilnes ten,

              sometilnes fiftv.
                2::E A, i.~. royal Inan.
                                 KIMMEl.                                 J26

Division, and Chyak-kan-na, Si-t(jk of the Lo\ver Division,
with a present for the Emperor of ten Kama captives.
   12th year, Spring, 3rd month. The Emperor gave the A.D. 551.
king of Pekche a present of 1000 bushels of seed-,vheat.
   This year, King Sy()ng-my()ng of Pekche, commanding an
army in person, together with troops from the two countries,
 [by the two countries Silla and Imna are meant J , invaded Kory(},
and conquered the territory of Hansyong. 1 Thence he again
moved forward his army and attacked Phy6ng.yang.~ Six
districts in all were eventually restored to their former terri- XIX. 33·
torial dependence.
   13th year, Summer, 4th month. The Imperial Prince, A.D. 552.
Yata no Tama-katsu no Ohoye, died.
   5th month, 8th day. Pekche, Kara, and Ara sent the T()k-
sol of the Middle Division, Mok-hyop-keum-ton~ and Asapita,
of the Kahachi Be,3 to make representation to the Emperor,
saying :-" Kory() and Silla, having established friendl~y relations
and joined their powers, design to overthrow thy servants'
countries, together with Imna. Therefore we humbly request
an auxiliary force, so that we may first attack them unawares.
The number of the troops is left to the Emperor's decision."
   The Emperor commanded, saying :-" We have now heard
all that the King of Pekche, the King of Ara, the King of Kara,
and the Omi of the Japanese Government 4 have conjointly h y                    p




their envoys represented to Us with regard to the state of
affairs. Let them continue, along with Imna, to unite their
hearts and strength as heretofore, and they will be undoubtedly'
blessed with the protection of High Heaven, and can, more-
over, place their trust in the spirits of the August Emperors."
   Winter, loth month. King Syong-myong of Pekche [also
called King SyongJ sent Kwi-si of the Western Division, and
the Tal-sol, Nu-ri Sa-chhi-hye, with a present to the Emperor
of an image of Shaka d Butsu in gold and copper/ several
flags and umbrellas, and a number of volumes of " Sutras."

    1 The present capital, conuTIonly called Soul.   This expedition is Inen-
tioned in the" Tongkaln."
   2 Phy6ng-yang was the capital of Kor)'o.

   :1 Apparently a Japanese. The Interlinear Kana has i\shihita.
  4 In Corea.                               .~ Sakyamuni.
  It Copper with a snlall adnlixture of gold.
           66                             N II-IONGI.
XIX. 34. Separately he presented a 111elnOrial in \vhich he lauded the
         merit of diffusing a broad religious \vorship, saying :-" This
         doctrine is amongst all doctrines the most excellent. But it is
         hard to explain, and hard to comprehend. Even the Duke of
         Cho\v J and Confucius had not attained to a kno\vledge of it.
         This doctrine can create religious merit 2 and retribution :3 \vith-
         out measure and \vithout bounds, and so lead on to a full
         appreciation of the highest "visdom. 4 Imagine a man in
         possession of treasures to his heart's content, so that he Blight
         satisfy all his \vishes in proportion as he used them. Thus it
XIX. 35· is "vith the treasure of this wonderful doctrine.   Every prayer
         is fulfilled and naught is wanting. Moreover, from distant
         India it has extended hither to the three Han/ \vhere there are
         none who do not receive it with reverence as it is preached to
         them.
            Thy servant, therefore, ~;fyi)ng/ King of Pekche, has humbly
         despatched his retainer, 'I N u-ri Sa-chhi, to transmit it to the
         Imperial Country, and to diffuse it abroad throughout the
         home provinces, so as to fulfil the recorded saying of Buddha:
         , My law shall spread to the East.' "
            This day the Emperor, having heard to the end, leaped for
         joy, and gave command to the Envoys, saying :-" Never from
         former days until now have we had the opportunity of listening
         to so wonderful a doctrine. We are unable, however, to decide
         of ourselves." Accordingly he inquired of his Ministers one
         after another, saying :-" The countenance of this Buddha
         which has been presented by the Western frontier State is of a
         severe dignity, such as we have never at all seen before. Ought
          it to be worshipped or not?" Soga no Oho-omi, Iname
          no Sukune, addressed the Emperor, saying :-" All the vVestern
          frontier lands without exception do it worship. Shall Akitsu
          Yamato alone refuse to do so ?" Okoshi, l\10nonobe no Oho-

             ) See" :rvrayers' Handbook," p. 21.          2 Sanskrit, Punya.-(;iles.

             :~ Either good or bad. Here in a good sense.                 ~ Bodhi.
             ;, Buddhisln had been introduced into Koryo A.D. 372, froln the Ch'in
           country in Western China. It penetrated to Pekche in 384.--'~ Tongkam,:'
           Vol. IV. pp. 4"7.
             t; This is the right name.
             7 The character used means the vassal of a vassal, and implies an ackno\v-
           ledgn1ent of Japan's suzerainty.
                               K I:~L\IEI.                           J26

muraji, and Kanlako, Nakatomi no Muraji, addressed the
Emperor jointly, saying :-" Those \vho have ruled the En1pire
in this our State have al\vays made it their care to \vorship in
Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter the ISO Gods of Heaven
and Earth, and the Gods of the Land and of Grain.              If
just at this time \ve \vere to \vorship in their stead foreign
Deities, it may be feared that we should incur the \\?rath of our
National Gods."
   The Emperor said :-" Let it be given to Iname no Sukune, XIX. 36
who has shown his willingness to take it, and, as an experi-
ment, make him to worship it."
   The Oho-omi knelt down and received it with joy. He
enthroned it in his house at Oharida, \vhere he diligently
carried out the rites of retirement from the world, and on that
score purified his house at I\luku-hara and nlade it a Temple.
After this a pestilence ,vas rife in the Land, from which the
 people died prematurely. As time went on it becan1e \vorse
and worse, and there was no ren1edy. Okoshi, l\Iononobe no
 Ohomuraji, and Kamako, Nakatomi no l\1uraji, addressed the
 Emperor jointly, saying :-" It was because thy servants; advice
on a former day was not approved that the people are dying
thus of disease.     If thou dost now retrace thy steps before
 matters have gone too far, joy will surely be the result! It
will be well promptly to fling it away, and diligently to seek
happiness in the future."
   The Emperor said :-" Let it be done as you advise." Accord-
ingly officials took the image of Buddha and abandoned it to
the current of the Canal of Naniha. They also set fire to the
Temple, and burnt it so that nothing was left. Hereupon,
 there being in the Heavens neither clouds nor \vind, a sudden
conflagration consumed the Great Hall (of the Palace).
   This year Pekche abandoned Han..syong and Phyong-yang.
 Silla took advantage of this to make an entrance and to settle
 in Han-syong. These are the present Silla towns of U -to-pang 1
 and Ni-mOi-pang [these names of places are unclear].
    14th year, Spring, 1st month, 12th day. Pekche sent Kwa- A. D. 553.
                                                                             XIX. 37.
   1 tf ill 1i and.It. ji ji ° Uto Ineans Ox-head, and \vas no doubt taken
from the name of the Mountain U -to-san. A C0111111entator says :-" Silla
and Koryo together attacked Pekche and took Han-syong and Phyong-yango
Han-syong ,vas Blade Utopang, and Phyong-yang Ni-lni-pang."
         68                             NIHONGJ.

           ya Chha-chyu, Tok-sol of the Higher Division, the Han-sol~
           Nye-se-ton, and others to ask for troops.
              15th day. The Pekche Envoys, l\1ok-hyop.keum-ton, Tok-
           sol of the Middle Division, and Kahachi Be no Asapita took
           their departure.
              Summer, 5th month, 7th day. The following report was
           received from the province of Kahachi :-" From within the
           sea at Chinu, in the district of Idzumi, there is heard a voice of
           Buddhist chants, which re-echoes like the sound of thunder,
           and a glory shines like the radiance of the sun." In his heart
           the Emperor wondered at this, and sent U nate 1 no Atahe
           .[here we have only Atahe, and the personal name is not given,
           probably owing to the error of some copyist] to go upon the
           sea and investigate the matter.
              This month Unate no Atahe went upon the sea, and the
           result was that he discovered a log of camphor-wood shining
           brightly as it floated on the surface. At length he took it, and
           presented it to the Emperor, who gave orders to an artist to
           make of it two images of Buddha. These are the radiant
           camphor-wood images now in the Temple of Yoshino.
              6th month. Uchi no Omi [the personal name not given]
            was sent on a mission to Pekche with a present of two good
            horses, two travelling barges, fifty bows, fifty sets 2 of arrows,
            and an Imperial message, saying :-" As to the troops asked for
            by the King, his wishes shall be complied with." A separate
XIX   38 • Imperial order was given, saying :-" The men learned in
            Medicine, in I)ivination,a and in the calendar,4 have to take it in
            turn to come up (to the Japanese Court) and to go down. The
            )rear and month having just now come for the above classes of
            men to be relieved, let them be sent with the Envoy on his
            return, so that they may be mutually exchanged. Let Us also
            be furnished with books of divination, calendars, and drugs of
            various kinds."
               Autumn, 7th month, 4th day. The Emperor visited the
             Palace of Magari in Kusunoki.
               By order of the Emperor, Saga no Oho-omi, Iname no

                    1 Or Misobe.                        2 See above, p. 64.
                    3 By the" Yih-King," or Book of Changes.
                    4 The first mention of calendars in the" N ihongi."
                              l{IMMEI.                                   69
Sukune, charged O-shin-mi 1 to keep an account of the shipping-
tax. He was accordingly made Chief over the ships, and the
style 2 was granted him of Funa no Fumibito. He was the
ancestor of the present Funa no Muraji. 3
    8th month, 7th day. Pekche sent Kwa-ya, Nasal of the
Higher Division, with a man of Silla named Mun-hyu-the-san,
Ko-tok of the Lower Division, and others, who presented a
memorial to the Emperor, saying :_H Last year thy servants
jointly sent U chi no Omi, the Tok-sol Chha-chyu, with a
High Official of Imna, to report to Your Majesty on the various
Miyake beyond the sea. I have humbly awaited Your Majesty's
gracious commands as the herbs in spring look up for
the refreshing showers. This year there is the unexpected
news that Silla and Koma have made a common plan, saying:
- ' Pekche and Imna resort frequently to Japan, doubtless in
order to ask for troops wherewith to invade our territories. If XIX. 39·
this be true, it will be the ruin of our country. We must be on
 the alert and watch. It may be hoped that we shall anticipate
 the Japanese troops and conquer Ara before they have started.
 We can then cut off their communications with Japan.' Such
 is their plan. When thy servant heard this he was profoundly
alarmed, and straightway dispatched a swift messenger and a
 light-sailing vessel speedily with a memorial informing you of
 this. I would humbly implore of the Celestial bounty that
 there may be speedily sent to our assistance in time for the
 autumn season, an army in two divisions, front and rear, one
 after the other, wherewith to make secure the Miyake beyond
 the sea. If they are later than this, our efforts will be as vain
 as the endeavour to bite one's navel.
    Thy servant will bear the expense of providing food and
  clothing for the troops which are sent, from the time of their
  arrival in his country. A similar arrangement would hold good
  on their arrival in Imna. But if their provisions are insufficient,
 thy servant will assuredly send supplies in aid and prevent
  there being any deficiency."
     A separate memorial said :-" Ikuba no Omi, having
  reverently received the Imperial commands, came and com-

        1 Of Corean extraction.                     ~   Lit. surnalne.
                         3 Secretary of Shipping.
         jO                           NIHONGI.

         forted thy servant's frontier state. Ever attentive morning
         and evening, he sedulously discharged his various functions.
         Therefore the frontier States beyond the sea all celebrated his
         goodness, and wished that he might live for ten thousand years
         to give peace to the lands beyond the, sea. Unfortunately he
         died, to our deep regret. And now who is there to direct the
         affairs of Jmna? I humbly beg of the Celestial bounty that
         some one be sent to replace him and continue his service, so
         that Jmna may have peace.
XIX. 40.    Moreover, the lands beyond the sea are very scarce of bows
         and horses. From old times until now, they have received
         them from the Emperor, and have therewith defended them-
         selves against their powerful enemies. I hum.bly pray the
         Celestial bounty to bestow on us a large supply of bows and
         horses."
            Winter, loth month, 20th day. Yo-chhyang, son of the
         King of Pekche [King Wi-t6k, son of King MyongJ, led forth
         all the troops of the kingdom against the land of I{ory().
         Having thrown up entrenchments on the Pek-hap 1 plain, he
         allowed his soldiers to sleep and eat. Looking out that
         evening over the great and fertile plain, with its level surface ex-
         tending far and wide, where few traces of man were to be seen,
         and not a dog was heard to bark, he all at once heard a sudden
         sound of fife and drum. Yo-chhyang was greatly astonished,
         and having beat his drums in response, kept strict watch all
         that night. At early dawn he got up and saw the broad plain
         covered everywhere \vith flags and banners, as a hill is covered
         with green foliage. When it became clear, a horseman
         appeared, wearing a gorget, two others carrying cymbals, and
         two with leopards' 2 tails stuck on them-in all five horsemen.
         They advanced bit alongside of bit, and inquired, sa~ying:­
         " Some boys told us that in our plain strangers were staying.
         How could we avoid going out courteously to receive them ? We
         now \vish that you should speedily become acquainted with us,
         and therefore, according to etiquette, Wf:; would ask your name,
XIX. 41. age and rank." Yo-chhyang answered and said :_H My name


           Pek-hap means " lily."
           1

          ~ The   Interlinear Kana has naka tsu kami, i.e. the God of the middle.
        The \volf and tiger are also called Gods.
                             KL\I~IEI.                            J26

is the same name; 1 mv rank is that of Han.. sol, and my age
is twenty..nine." Pekche having in turn made inquir)T, an
answer was given after the same manner. Finally marks 2 were
set up, and they fought together. Thereupon Pekche, with his
spear, thrust down from his horse the Koryo warrior, and having
cut off his head, raised it aloft on the point of his spear,
returned to camp, and showed it to the troops. The Koryo
generals were very indignant, while the shouts of joy of the
Pekche men were like to rend asunder Heaven and Earth.
Next some of the generals of auxiliary troops beat their drums,
and engaging quickly in the fight, drove back the King of Kor)rQ
to the top of Mount Tong-syong.
   15th year, 1st month, 7th day. The Imperial Prince, A.D. 554-
 Nunakura Futo-dama-shiki no Mikoto, vvas raised to the position
 of Prince Imperial.
   9th day. Pekche sent Mok.. hyop Mun-chhil, Si·tok of the
 Middle Division, and Wal-cha Pun-ok, Si-tok of the Former
 Division, to Tsukushi, to communicate with U chi no Omi,
 Saheki no Muraji, and his colleagues. They said :-" The
 Tok-sol, Chha-chyu, with the Han-sol, Se-ton, and the rest,
 arrived on the 4th day of the Intercalary month of last year
 and stated that the ami [i.e. U chi no ami] and his colleagues
 would come in the first month of this year. But although they
 said so, it is still doubtful whether you are coming or not.
 Moreover, what of the number of the troops? We pray that
 you ,viII inform us of their number, so that \ve may prepare XIX. 42.
 cantonments in advance."
    In a separate communication, they said :-" We have just
 heard that thou, by command of the August Emperor, hast
 arrived in Tsukushi in charge of the troops besto\ved on us by
 him. Nothing could compare with our joy when "re heard
 this. The campaign of this year is a much more dangerous
 one than the last; and we beg that the force granted to us
 may not be allowed to be later than the first month."
    Hereupon Uchi no ami answered in accordance with the
 commands of the Emperor :-" Accordingly there is being

  1 i.e. as your own.    The Koryo and Pt:kche kings \vere of the same
family orig-inally.
  ~ Flags to indicate the field of combat-the lists.
72                              NIIIONGJ.

sent an auxiliary force to the number of 1000 men, 100 horses,
and 40 ships."
   2nd month. Pekche sent General Sam-kwi, Han-sol of the
Lower Division, with Mononobe no 0; Nasal of the Senior
Division, to ask for auxiliaries. They took the opportunity of
offering Mak-ko, son of Tong-syong,2 in exchange for the
 Nasol Won, son of Tong-syong, whose turn it had previously
been,3 and Wang Yang-kwi, a man learned in the five classics,
in exchange for the Ko-tok, 11a Tyong-an, and the Buddhist
priest Tam-bye, and eight others in exchange for To-sim and
six others.
   Separately, in obedience to the Imperial comlnands, they
brought the Si-tok, Wang To-nyang, a man learned in
divination, the Ko-tok, V\'ang Po-son, a man learned in the
calendar, the Nasol, Wang-yu-neung-tha, a physician, the Si-
tok, Pon-nyang-phung, and the Ko-tok, Pyong-yu-tha, herbalists,
the Si-tok, Sam-keun, the Rye-tok, Kwi-ma-chha, the Kye-tok,4
Chin-no, and the Te-tok,5 Chin-tha, musicians, all which persons
were exchanged according to request.
   3rd month, 1st day. The Pekche envoys Mok-hyop Mun-
chha, Si-tok of the Middle Division, and his colleagues took
their departure.
  Summer, sth month, 3rd day. Uchi no Omi proceeded to
Pekche in command of a naval force.
   Winter, 12th month. Pekche sent Mun-sa Kan-no, Han-
sol of the Lower Division, who presented a memorial,
saying :-" Thy servants, Myong, Kin~ of Pekche, the various
Omi of Wa 6 resident in Ara, and the Kanki of all the provinces
of Imna, beg to report to Your Majesty the unprincipled
conduct of Silla, who, having no dread of the Emperor, has
formed an alliance \vith Koryo, and designs to destroy the
1Iiyake North of the Sea. Thy servants having consulted
together, sent Uchi no Omi and others to ask for troops

  lOis ,~. i.e. Cro,v. Mononohe is Japanese. How the Coreans pro·
nounced it is altogether uncertain.
  2 A former King of pekche.

  J 1'0 serve as hostage.  See above, p. 62.
  4 Tenth rank, green girdle.              5 Eleventh rank, yellow girdle.

  6 The use of \Va for Japan in this passage is curious.   If it is genuine,
probably the earlier use of Nippon is retrospective.
                               KIM~IEI.                                  73
wherewith to make war on Silla. Accordingly the Emperor
sent Uchi no Omi in command of a force, which arrived in the XIX. 43.
sixth month. Thy servants were profoundly rejoiced, and on
the ninth day of the twelfth month sent an expedition to attack
Silla. Before this thy servant had sent Mononobe no Mak-ka-
mu no Muraji,1 Governor of the Eastern Quarter, in command
of the troops of that Quarter, to lay siege to the castle of Ham-
san. The people brought over by Uchi no Omi, along with
Mak·ka Wi-sa-kwi, Tsukushi no Mononobe, who were skilled
in shooting fire-arrows, under the protection of the August
spirits of the Emperors, set fire to the castle and took it at
sunset on the ninth day of the month. Therefore I have sent
a special envoy in a swift ship to make this report to Your
 Majesty." 2
   In a separate address he said :-" If it were Silla alone, the
troops under the command of Uchi no Omi would be sufficient.
 But now Koma and Silla have joined their hearts and united
 their strength, so that success will be difficult. I humbly pray
 that all the troops of the Island of Tsukushi may be at once
sent to the assistance of thy servant's country, and also to the
assistance of Imna. In that case we shall be successful."
   He further represented as follows :-" Thy servant despatched
a separate force of 10,000 men to the assistance of Jmna, and
 at the same time sent information of this to Your Majesty.
 Now matters are in a critical condition, and I report them
 by a fast-sailing 3 vessel. I beg moreover to presen:t to Your
 Majesty two rolls of brocade of superior quality, one of woollen
 carpet, 300 axes, with two men and five women belonging to
 the captured castle,' of such trifling value that I fear to look
 back on them." 0
    When Yo-chhyang was considering his plan of campaign
 against Silla, an old man 6 remonstrated with him, saying :-
 "Heaven does not yet grant it. Disaster is to be feared."

  1 A curious mixture of Japanese and Corean in this name.     In the rest of
these messages it seems to be the King alone \vho is speaking.
  2 The "Tongkam " says :-" Silla and Koryo having fornled an alliance,

the King of Pekche \vas angry, and in person led a force of infantry and
cavalry with which he laid siege to the Castle of Kosan-san."
  3 I take . , grass, to be a mistake for !f'., fast.    " See above, p. 64
  a The" Tsii-sho " commentator suspects a lacuna here.         6 Or plural.
           74                              NIHONGI.

           Yo-chh)~ang said :-" Old   man! \vhy be so timid? I serve a
XIX. 44. great country. Ho\v can there be any cause for apprehension? ,-
         So he eventually invaded the I..,and of Silla, and built the
         fortress ofI~uta-mura.l His father, King Myong, ,vas distressed
         that Yo-chhyang should have so long to bear the sufferings of
         the campaign, deprived for lengthened intervals of sleep and
         food, his o\vn parental affection feeling many a want, ,vhile
         his son's filial care was reduced to scanty limits. Accordingl}~
         he went out to join him and comfort him in his toil. Silla,
         hearing that I{ing 1fyong was coming in person, set on foot
         the \\Thole armed force of the kingdom, intercepted him by the
         way, and crushed him. At this time Silla said to Kota ~also
         called Kokchi~ a groom-slave of Sachi-mura : ~ -" Thou I{oto
         art a vile slave: King Myong is a famous Prince. If now the
         mean slave ,vere made to slay the famous Prince, he might
         hope to transmit his name to posterity, and not be forgotten
         in the mouths of men."
             27th da)T. Koto accordingl~Y' took King Myong, and ,vith
         repeated obeisances, said to him :-" I beg leave to cut off Your
          Majesty's head." King l\Iyong ans\vered and said :-" A king's
          head should not pass into the hands of a slave." Koto said : -
          " By our country's la\v, those \vho break their oaths, even \vere
         they called kings, must fall into tI-le hands of slaves."
                  One book has :-" King My'ong sat do\vn on a chair, and
               having taken off the s,vord ,vhich hung at his girdle, gave
               it to Kokchi to sla)y him there,yith."
             King Myong looked up to Heaven, sighed deeply', and ,yith
          tears gave his consent, saying :-" \Vhatever ,yay I turn my
          thoughts, pain al\vays enters my" marrow. Nor on reflection
          is there any means by \vhich there is a possibility~ of ill)" life
          being saved." So he held forward his head, and submitted to
          have it cut off. Koto cut off his head and so killed him. He
          then dug a grave and buried him.
XIX. 45-           One book says :-" Silla buried King 1\lyong's skull, but
               the other bones were sent ,,,,ith due ceremony to pekche.
               Apparently a Japanese nalne.
                1
               A Japanese nalne. :r-'or 111ura the Interlinear J~ana has Sukiri or Sukur ,
                2

           apparently a rendering of a Corean word lueaning village-n1aster. But
           this would require the addition of ;t, Inaster. Perhaps this character has
           been accidentally omitted.
                                KL\L\IEI.                               75
     N O\V the I~ing of Silla buried I~ing Myong's bones 1 at the
     bottom of the stairs of the Northern Hall of his Palace,
     and gave this Hall the name of To-tang." 2
   Yo-chhyang, finding at last that he \vas surrounded,
attempted to make his \vay through, but could not. His
troops were tak~n with consternation, and kne\v not what to
do. N O\V there was a skilful archer, a Miyakko of the Land of
Tsukushi. He advanced, bent his bo\v, and taking aim, shot
down one of the bravest of the Silla horsemen. The
penetration of the arrow which he shot \vas such that it went
through the bow of the saddle on which he rode, both before
and behind, and reached the joining of the armour 3 he had on.
Then he \vent on shooting arro\vs one after another like rain,
more and more fiercely, without any remission, and shot to the
ground the troops by whom they ,vere surrounded. By this
means Yo-chhyang and his generals were enabled to escape
back by a by-road. Yo-chhyang complimented the Kuni no XIX. 46
Miyakko on having shot do\vn the troops who had encom-
passed them, and conferred on hin1 the honOrar)T name of
Kurani no Kimi. 4
   Upon this the Silla generals, satisfied that Pekche was com-
pletely worn out, wished at length to take measures for the
destruction of the remainder. But there was one general \\Tho
said :-" This would be a mistake. The Emperor of Japan has
frequently attacked our country on account of Imna: much
more should we certainly invite upon ourselves future mischief
if we should proceed to take steps for the destruction of the
Miyake of Pekche." This project was therefore dropped.
   r6th year, Spring, 2nd month. Y?o-chhyang, son of the King f\.D. 555.
of Pekche, sent Prince Hye [Prince Rye ,vas the younger
brother of Wi-tok] ~ with a message to the Emperor, saying:-
"King Syong-myong has been slain by brigands" [slain by

  1  The skull is no doubt ll1eant.
  2  Tang means hall. To is apparently in allusion to Koto, the King's
executioner. The" Tongkaln " has also an account of these events. But it
makes the King of Pekche to have been killed in battle.
  3 The -Interlinear Kana has kabuto, helmet, ,\'hich is manifestly absurd.

  4 The Knight of the Saddle-bow.

  f> \Vi-tbk is the historical name of Yo-chhyang.     He was succeeded by
his second son, Hye-chang, who is probably the Prince here referred to.
         J26                        NIHONGI.

         Silla in the 15th year of the reign, and therefore this report to
         the Emperor]. When the Emperor heard this he was indig-
         nant, and sent an envoy to nleet him at the port \vith a message
         of condolence. Hereupon Kose no Omi inquired of Prince
         Hye :-" Dost thou \vish to remain here or to proceed to thine
         o\vn country?" Rye answered and said :-" Trusting in the
         influence of the Emperor, it is my hope to revenge myself on
         the enemies of the King my father. I pray him to besto\v his
         compassion on me and grant me a numerous armed force so
         that I ma~y \vipe out my disgrace, and repay m)l" enemies.
         Whether I go or whether I remain, ho\v should I dare to do
         otherwise than simply obey his commands?" Presently' Soga
         no Omi condoled \vith him, sa)l"ing :-" King Syong had a
         wonderful mastery of the La\v of Heaven, and the principles of
         Earth: 1 his fame was spread abroad through the four quarters
XIX. 47· and the eight points of the compass. We hoped that he \vould
         long maintain peace, and rule over the frontier States \vest of
         the sea, and that for a thousand, nay for ten thousand y'ears
         he would render allegiance to our Emperor. But to our sur-
        prise, in a morning, he passed up\\Tards and was lost in the
        infinite. Like flo"ving water, he returns not again, but remains
        at rest in the dark dwelling. Oh! what a cruel grief, \vhat a
        heartrending sorrow! Who is there possessed of feeling \vho
        does not lament his death? For what special fault, moreover,
        has this calamity come? But now what art shall be used to
        give tranquillity to your country? "
            Hye answered and said :-" Thy servant is by nature foolish,
        and knows not great counsels, much less the causes of good or
        ill fortune, or of the ruin or preservation of a State."
            The Minister Soga said ;-" Formerly, in the reign of the
        Emperor Oho-hatsuse,2 thy country was hard pressed by Karyn,
        and \vas in an extremely critical position, like that of a pile of
        eggs. Thereupon the Emperor commanded the minister of
        the Shinto religion reverently to take counsel of the Gods.
        Accordingly the priests,S by divine inspiration, answered and
        said :-' If after humble prayer to the Deity, the founder of the

          1 By the former astronomy is meant; under the latter is included

        geon1ancy and physical geography.
          2 Yuriaku Tenno.  See Vol. I. p. 353.             :i Hafuri.
                                  KIMMEr.                                    77
Land, l thou goest to the assistance of the Ruler \vho is
threatened \vith destruction, there ,viII surely be tranquillity to
the State and peace to the people.' Prayer ,vas therefore
offered to the God, aid ,vas rendered, and the peace of the
countr.y was consequentl~y assured.          Now the God ,vho
originally founded this country' is the God who descended from
Heaven and established this State in the period ,vhen Heaven
and Earth became separated, and when trees and herbs had
speech.j I have recently been informed that your country has XIX. 48•
ceased to worship him. a But if you now repent your former
errors, if you build a shrine to the God and perform sacrifice in
honour of his divine spirit, your country \vill prosper. Thou
must not forget this."
   Autumn, 7th month, 4th day. Iname no Sukune Saga no
Oho-omi and Hodzumi no Ihayumi no Omi \vere despatched
to the five districts of Kibi to establish the Miyake of Shirawi.
   8th month. Yo-chhyang of Pekche addressed his Ministers,
saying :-" I 4 now desire, for the sake of the King, my deceased
father, to leave the world and practise religion." The Minis-
ters and the people ans\vered and said :-" \\T e have no\\'
received the instructions intimating to us Your Majesty's wish
to be allowed to retire from the \vorld and to practise religion.
Ah! \vhose fault \vas it that firm plans were not made in the
first place, of which neglect so great evils have been the conse-
quence ? From the foundation of this kingdom until the
                                                      ~ See v 01. I. p. 64.
                                                            r
  1    Oho-na-n10chi no Kan1i.
   :s The" 'I'sli-sh6" con1mentator here quotes the follo\ving curious statenlent
fr0111 a \vork called the" Sei-to-ki " :-" In the reign of the Elnperor K\Vamn1U
(7 82 --806) \ve and Corea had \vritings of the saIne kind. The E111perOr,
disliking this, burnt thenl and said: -' These speak of the God who founded
the country, and do not Inention the Gods our ancestors.'" But possibly
 this only refers to the legend of f.( 1t, Tan-kun, \vhich the" Tongkam"
 gives as follo\\'s :-" In the Eastern region (i.e. Corea) there \vas at first no
 chief. Then there \vas a divine man \vho descended under a sandal tree.
 The people of the Land established hinl as their Lord. He \vas called
 Tan-kun (Sandal-lord), while the country received the name of Chason
 (ll1orning freshness). This ,vas in the reign of (the Chinese Emperor)
 T'ang;Yao (H.C. 2357-2258), the year Mon-shen. The capital ,,"as at first
 Phyong-yang; it was after\vards removed to Pek-ak (the "'hite hill). In
 the 8th year (B.C. 1317) of the reign ofWu Ting, of the Shang Dynasty, he
 entered Mount Asatal (Asita ?) and becalne a God."
     4 Lit. "the snlall child.';

  VOL. II.                                                            G
         J26                           NIHONGI.

          present year Koryo and Silla have \Tied with each other in their
          efforts to destroy it. To what country, therefore, could our
          national line of sovereigns novv be entrusted? In principle
          Your 1'Iajesty's instructions ought unquestionably to be com-
          plied with. For if the words of the old man had been attended
          to, how should \ve have arrived at our present condition? We
          beseech Your Majesty, therefore, to repent your former errors.
          But do not take the trouble to retire from the world. If you
          \vish to fulfil your v'ow, let a number of the people of the Land
          be made to enter religion." Yo-chhyang answered and said:-
          "Be it so." Accordingly he applied to his Ministers for
          advice. They at length consulted together upon the n1atter,
          and caused one hundred persons to enter religion. They also
          made a large number of banners and umbrellas and meritorious
          things of all kinds, etc.., etc.
A.D. 556.    17th year, Spring, 1St month. Prince Rye of Pekche asked
          leave to return home. He was accordingly presented \vith a
          very' large 5uppl:y of weapons and good horses. Moreover,
          gifts were liberally bestowed (on his followers), so that the:y
         uttered respectful exclamations (of gratitude).
            Hereupon Abe no Omi, Saheki no Muraji, and Harima no
         Atahe \vere sent in command of a naval force of the Land of
         'rsukushi to escort him to his country. The Lord of Hi 1 in
         Tsukushi was sent separately [the Pekche " Original Record"
         says :-" Son of the Lord of Tsukushi and younger brother of
XIX. 49· the l\1iddle Lord of Hi "] in command of 1000 valiant soldiers
         to escort him to 11ite [name of a port], and he was accord-
         ingly made to guard the strong positions on the way to the
         port.
            Autumn, 7th month, 6th day. Soga no Oho-ami, Iname no
         Sukune 2 and others \vere sent to the district of I{ojima in
         Hither Kibi 3 to establish a 1'Iiyake, of VtThich I\lidzuko, I{atsuraki
         no Yamada no Atahe, was made Tadzukahi.4
            Winter, loth month. Saga no Oho-ami, Iname no Sukune
         and others were sent to the district of Takechi in Yamato to

          1 Another reading is T~ukusbi no Oho-Kilni, i.e. the Great Lord of

        Tsukushi.
          :? Only one person.

          :3 This rendering follo",'s the" Original Conllllentary.:'

          .. The Chinese characters mean " rural or rice-field governor."
                                  KIMMEl.                                   79
establish the ~Iiyake of Ohomusa of Coreans [by Coreans is
meant Pekche people] and the 1fiyake of \Vomusa 1 of Koryi;
men. The Miyake of Ama in the Land of !(i \vas established
in the Land of }{i. [One \vriting says :-" TIle Coreans of
various places \vere made serfs of the lVliyake of Ohomusa and
the !(oryc) men \vere made serfs of the 1tIiyake of \Vomusa. It
,vas in consequence of the appointment of the Coreans and
Koryo men as serfs that these places \vere styled Miyake." ~J
   18th ~year, Spring, 3rd month, 1st day. Prince Yo-chhyang A.n. 557·
of Pekche succeeded to the throne. He was styled King
Wi-toke
   21st year, Autumn, 9th month. Silla sent the Namal ~4 A.D. 560.
Michi Kwichi \vith an offering of tribute. His entertainment
was unusually liberal. The N amal was rejoiced thereat, and
50 took his departure.     It was said ;-" In the case of tribute XIX. 50.
Envoys the State is all-important and private considerations
are despised. On an ambassador depend the lives of the
people, and it is a governmental abuse \vhen a mean person is
selected for this position. Such a course is quite unjustifiable.
It is desired that sons of good families should be selected as
ambassadors, and not persons of mean extraction." 4
  22nd year. Silla sent the Keup-pol-kan/' Ku-nye-cheul, with A.I>. 561 •
an offering of tribute. He was entertained by the official
charged with the reception of strangers on a lower scale of
ceremony than usual. The Keup-pol-kan Vvl'as enraged, and
took his departure.
  This year the Te-sa,6 Notyo, was sent again to present the
former tribute at Oho-kuni in Naniha.          In arranging the
precedenc, of the various frontier States, the entertainers,
Nukadabe no Muraji and Katsuraki no Atahe, made him take
rank below Pekche and introduced him in this order. The

  1    Ohon1usa and W0111USa are respectively Great Musa and Little l\lusa.
  ~    It \vould appear froln this that it \vas essential to a Miyake to have a
ntnnber of serfs attached to it. Possibly ~ )\ in this passage should

    •i 'The" Tongkaul" has  *
be rendered Kara nlen instead of Coreans.
                                   bi, i.e. Nanla, 11th official rank. The
Shoku "Nihongi " has also Nama, which is doubtless correct.
   -4 This is apparently a renlonstrance addressed to Silla for sending as

alnbassador a Ulan of the eleventh rank.
  .~ Seventeenth rank.                              6 T\ve!fth rank.
        80
         J26                            NIHONGI.

           Te-sa "vas angry. He went a\va~y and refused to enter the
XIX. 51. official residence.    He went on board ship and returned to
           Anato. 1 At this time the official building at Anato \vas being
           repaired. The Te-sa inquired :-" For what guest is this con-
           struction? " The chief builder, Oshikatsu, Kahachi no
           Mumakahi no Obito, mockingly said :-" It is for the lodging
           of the ambassador who is being sent to call the Western Land
           to an account for its rude conduct." The Te-sa, on returning
           to his country, reported this speech, and therefore Silla built
           a fortress on Mount Araphasa as a defence against Japan.
A.D. 562 .    23rd year, Spring, 1st month. Silla destroyed the Miyake
           of Imna.
                   One writing says :-" 21st year. Imna was destroyed.
                The general term Imna includes the provinces called
                separately Kara, Ara, Siliki, Tara, Cholma, Kochhi,
                Chatha, Sanpanha, K\\Tison, and Imn)re, in all ten
                provinces." 2
              Summer, 6th month. An edict was issued, as follows:-

          1  N O\V Shin10noseki.
          2  The "Tongkam" (Vol. \'. p. :2 I) gives the follo\\ying account of the
        downfall of Imna :-
           u Autumn, 9th month.    (The year is the san1e, but the 1110nth given does
        not agree ,vith the' Nihongi; account.)
           Silla destroyed Great Kaya. Kaya was refractory, and the King con1-
        manded the I-son I-sa-pu to attack it. Sa-ta-sya was associated \vith hitn
        in the comlnand. Sa-ta-sya was a descendant in the 7th generation of
        King Ne-mil (or Ne-mul). He was sixteen years of age, and was accounted
        a national hero. More than 1000 111en of his followers came and begged
        that he might join in the can1paign, but the King would not allo\v it on
        account of his youth. On their persisting in their request, however, he gave
        his permission. Sa-ta-sya ,vent to Great Kaya in conlmand of 5000 horse-
        men, and ,vas the first to enter the Sandalwood gate, where he set up a
        white flag. Those in the castle were struck with consternation, and I-sa-pu,
        approaching with his troops, at length destroyed that country, the territory
        being constituted the district of Great Kaya. When the army returned and
        the merits were weighed, Sya was reckoned first, and the King- re\varded
        him with good rice-land and 300 of the captives. These he steadfastly
        refused. The King, however, insisted, and he then accepted, but distributed
        the land among his troops, reserving only the barren tract of Chhyuk-syon.
        He released the captives and converted them everyone into good subjects
        (i.e. free men). The nation admired this conduct. He died at the ag-e
        of seventeen." It will be observed that there is not a word here about
        Japan.
                                 K I~Il\IEI.                              81

"The Silla people, a tribe of wretches in the \Vest, have, in
defiance of Heaven and devoid of right feeling, disregarded the
favour \Ve have shown them. They have broken Our Miyake,
poisoned Our black-haired people, and massacred the population
of Our districts. When Our ancestor, Okinaga Tarashi hime no
Mikoto,l a \vonderful sage of clear intelligence, made a tour
throughout the En1pire, showing her anxiety on behalf of all
the people and nourishing her myriad subjects, she pitied the
condition of Silla, which was then reduced to an extremity, and XIX. 52.
spared the head of its king, \vhich \vas about to fall. She
granted to Silla strong positions, and bestowed on it honours it
was not entitled to. In what respect did OUf ancestof, Okinaga
Tarashi hime no Mikoto, show a want of consideration for
Silla, or Our people an unfriendly feeling to\vards that country?
Yet Silla with long spears and strong bows has oppressed
Imna. \Vith serrated tusks and hooked talons they have com-
mitted ravage amongst the living souls, rending their livers
and hacking off their feet ,vith insatiable deli~ht, scorching
their bones in the sun, and burning their dead bodies \vithout
saying to themselves that it \vas cruel. From the Noble House
do\vn to the people of Imna, using all their knives and
expending their last chopping-block, they have butchered and
made mince-meat of them. Within the shores of the land, who
is no\v left to be called a servant of the King? 2 Who is there
that eats grain, the food of man, or drinks water, his beverage,
who can bear to hear these things without being grieved in his
heart? Much more the heir to the Throne and the Oho-ami !
For the former, bound as he is by hereditary friendship, it is an
occasion to weep tears of blood and cherish feelings of revenge.
In the case of the latter, there is towards officials charged with
the frontier screen the gratitude due to those who rub them-
selves smooth ~ from cro\vn to heel (in their country's service).
Heirs in their generation to the virtues of previous govern-
ments, and themselves destined to hold high dignity in a later

  1   Jingo K6gu.                 ~   See Legge's" Sheking,i' p. 360.
  a An allusion to ~lencius's saying, "The philosopher Mih loves all equally.
If by rubbing SUlooth his ,,,hole body {roln the cro\\pn to the heel, he could
have benefited the Elnpire, he ,,'ould have done it."-Legge's " Mencius,'1
p. 340. This, again, refers to the great Yu, who wrought and ,vaded till he
had worn a,,'ay all the hair on his legs.
         J26                             NIHONGI.

         reign, if they cannot, by making drip their gall and drawing
         out their bov·.rels,l join with Us in slaying the traitors, thus
         wiping off this bitter outrage against Heaven and Earth, and
         doing vengeance on the enemies of a Lord and father, even in
         my grave I shall be indignant that the right rule of conduct of
         vassal and child has not been realized." 2
XIX. 53-    In this month, a certain person slandered Uta-)rori, :Nlumakahi
         no Omi, saying :-" Uta-yori's \vife met me at Sanuki. 3 Her
         saddle-pad was different from ordinar)T ones. When I examined
         it closely, I sa\v that it was the Enlpress's saddle." He was
         accordingl~y handed over to the judicial authority, \vho put him
         to the most severe examination. U ta-yori, ~1 umakahi no Onli,
         accordingly' declared upon oath, saying :-" This is false, and
         not true. If this is true, let calamity from Heaven surely befall
         me." At last he fell prostrate on the ground under the torture,
         and died. N"o long time after his death, there were sudden
         misfortunes in the Palace. The judicial officer then arrested
         his sons, Morishi and Nasehi [Morishi and Nasehi are personal
         names J, and when about to cast them into the fire [Casting
         into the fire was no doubt the ancient n10de of punishmentl ,
         uttered a charm, saying :-" Not by my hand are they cast."
         Having uttered this charm, he was about to fling them into the
         fire, when ~1orishi's mother made a prayer, saying :-" If ill}·
         child is flung into the fire, a great calarnity will indeed follow.
XIX. 54- I beseech thee, let him be given over to the Hafuri, to be a
         slave in the service of the Gods." I n accordance, t}lerefore,
          1   i.e. by the exercise of the most devoted loyalty.
          2   European scholars will readily endorse the opinion of l\lotoori, that such
        Itnperial edicts as the above are inventions of the \vriters of the" Nihongi,"
        or perhaps of some predecessor. They are not State papers, but rhetorical
        exercises, and smell unulistakably of the Ialnp. The" Shoku-nihongi,"
        which continues the history of Japan froll1 the point "'There the" Nihongi"
        leaves off, contains a nUluber of genuine edicts of the ancient Elnperors.
         fhese are very different documents, ,vritten, of course, \vith Chinese
        characters, but, like the ,. Norito" and luuch of the ,.. Kojiki," in such a way
        as to suggest the Japanese \vards in the \\Titer's luind, and \vithout any
        endeavour to lllake a display of Chinese learning or elegance of style.
           l\'1otoori has collected these edicts and published thenl \vith a comnlentary
        under the title JIt    ~JJ iN ~  WI·
           The present edicf is composed ahllost entirely of phrases taken fro::1
        Chinese books.
              Not the province of that name, but a place in Yanlato.
                                  KIMMEl.

\vith his mother's supplication, he \vas pernlitted to be con-
fiscated to the service of the Gods.
   Autumn, 7th month, 1St day. Silla sent envoys to offer
tribute. These envo)~s knew of the destruction of Imna by
Silla, but, ashamed of the offence against national gratitude,
they did not dare to ask leave to depart. Eventually they
remained, and did not return to their own land, but ,vere made
to take rank as su bjects of the State. They were the ancestors
of the Silla men of the village of U no in the district of Sarara
in the province of Kahachi.
   In this month, the General-in-Chief, I~i no Won1aro no
 Sukune, was sent forth in command of an arrny by \vay of
 Tari, and the Associate General, Nihe, I~ahabe no Omi, by wa)r
of ~Jount Ko-cheung, to demand of Silla its reasons for attacking
 Imna. At length they arrived at Imna. Toni, K01110-tsunle
 Be no Obita, ,vas sent to Pekche to concert a plan of ll1ilitary
 operations. Toni accordingly lodged in his \vife's house, and
 lost a letter and a bow and arro\vs by the \\ray. Silla thus
 gained a thorough kno\vledge of the military plans, and having
 promptly raised a large army, brought on itself overthro\v, and
 rendered subrnission and allegiance.            Ki no \V0I11arO no
 Sukune, having gained the victor}~, marched his arn1Y into the
 Pekchc camp, where he addressed an order to the troops,
 saying :-" It is the excellent advice of antiquity that in victor~y
 one should not forget defeat: that in safety it is necessary to
 bethink oneself of danger. On the frontier which \ve now hold,
\volves meet in mutual intercourse. Such being the case,
 ought \ve to be heedless and not to think of disaster? Even in
 times of peace, the sword should not be laid aside. For a wise
 n1an's warlike preparation ought not to be relaxed. I pray you, XIX. 55.
 be very watchful, and zealously observe this cOIl1mand.·' 1 The
 soldiery all entrusted their hearts to him, and applied them-
 selves to their duties. N ihe, Kahabe no Omi, advanced alone,
 and in successive engagements captured all that opposed him.
  The Silla men again raised the white flag, flung do\vn their
 arms, and bo\ved their heads in submission. Nihe, J{ahabe no
  On1i, never having had any skill in military matters, raised the
 \vhite flag in reply, as a sin1ple intimation to advance alone. The

    1   Most of this speech is copied frOll1 a passage in a Chinese author.
         J26                            NIHONGI.

         Silla comn1ander said :-" General Kahabe no Omi now wishes
         to surrender," and advancing his troops, made an onset. With
         all their pointed weapons the)T hastened to the attack, and
         routed the vanguard. The wounded were very numerous.
         Tahiko, Yamato no Runi no Miyakko, conscious that help ",'as
         impossible, abandoned his troops and took to flight. The
         Silla commander, his hooked spear in hand, pursued as far as
         the castle-moat, and flourishing his spear, struck at him.
         But Tahiko, inasmuch as he was mounted on a swift horse,
         leaped across the castle-moat, and narrowly' escaped with his
         life. The Silla commander stood on the edge of the moat,
         and exclaimed, saying :-" I{usunichari "1 (a Silla ,vord of
         uncertain meaning]. Hereupon Kahabe no Omi at length
         \vithdrew his forces, and retreating, hurriedl~y encamped on the
         plain. Upon this his troops all held him in contempt, and
         there was none to yield him obedience. The c01l1mander
         advanced in person within the camp, and took them all
         prisoners, viz. Nihe, Kahabe no Omi, and his men, as ,veIl as his
XIX. 56. wife, who accompanied him. At this time, between father and
         child, husband and wife, there ,vas no mutual commiseration.
         The commander inquired of Kahabe no Onli, sa)ring:-
         " \Vhich is more dear to thee-thine own life, or that of thy
         wife? ~, He answered and said :-" \\Thy, for the love of one
         woman, should I accept disaster? There is nothing dearer than
         life," ·and eventually granted her to be his concubine. The
         commander at length ravished her in a public place. She
         afterwards returned, and Kahabe no Omi wished to approach
         her and talk to her. But she was deeply mortified, and refused
         to consort with him, saying :-" Thou, my former lord, having
         for no good reason sold thy handmaiden's person, with what
         countenance could I now live with thee?" And she persisted
         in her refusal to speak to him. This lady was the daughter
         of Sakamoto no Omi, and her name was Mumashi hime.
         Ikina, Mitsugi no Kishi, who was captured at the same time,
         being a man of mettle, utterly refused to submit. The Silla
         commander drew his s,vord, and making as if to kill him, com-
         pelled him \vith threats to take off his trousers, and then told
         him to present his hinder part towards Japan, and callout

                 1   I cannot identify this \vith any modern Corean words.
                                    KI~L\lEI.                                  85
with a loud voice," Let the Japanese generals bite 1 - - - , "
But he cried out, saying :-" Let the King of Silla bite -- - - ! "
No matter how much they tortured him, he ,vent on shouting
as before, and he \vas accordingly put to death. Moreover his
son \Vojiko embraced his father, and so died. So hard it
al\vays "vas to shake Ikina's determination to stick to his own
language. Accordingly, he alone was lamented by all the
generals. Moreover, his wife Ohobako 2 was taken captive at
the sanle time. In her grief she made a song, saying 3 : -
                          Standing by the fortress
                          Of the Land of Kara,
                          Ohobako                                                    XIX. 57.
                          \Vaves her head-scarf,
                          ~rurning to\\'ards \'amato.


   Someone composed a song in response, saying:-
                          Standing by the fortress
                          Of the Land of Kara,
                          Ohobako
                          Is seen to \vave her head-scarf,
                          Turning to\vards N aniha.

     1 We should expect to find here the \vord " kiss ;, instead of" bite.:'   But
the fact is that neither the Chinese nor the Japanese have the thing or the
 \vord, at least quite in our sense. Kissing, or \vhat \ve nlay call so. is in
these countries not considered a proper subject of conversation, and does not
 figure in their literatures. The nearest Japanese equivalent is kuchi SHU, i.e.
. ~ mouth-sucking." The only instance I can recollect of the use of this
phrase is in a letter from Hideyoshi to his son Hideyori, then five years of
age. He prolnises that he will soon come to see hiln and give him a kiss
(kuchi-sui-lnosu-beku s6r6), expressing at the same time a playful jealousy
of his allo\ving other people to kiss hiln. The Japanese editor of this letter
finds it necessary to explain that kissing, or rather mouth-sucking, is a sign
of affection.
     Dr. Schlegel, of the Universitr of Leiden, informs me that "a Chinese
boy never kisses his lllother-they rub their respective noses over the cheeks.
 Kissing the hand is totally unknown in China."
     The use of the \vord bite for kiss by the Chinese suggests that the kiss
tnay be a Inodification of a playful bite, just as the sHlile may have had
its origin in a sportive sho\ving of the canine teeth. See Darwin's" Expres-
sion of the Emotions," p. 255.
    :! The nalne of a plant.

    :~ Another rendering is : " In grief for her, they (i.e. the generals) made a
song, saying :-"
         86                            NIHONGI.

            8th month. The Emperor sent Sadehiko, Ohotomo no
         Muraji as general-in-chief in command of an army of several
         tens of thousands of men to attack Koryo. Accordingly
         Sadehiko, acting on plans laid by Pekche, routed Koryo.
         Their King climbed over a wall, and so made his escape.
         Sadehiko at length followed up his victory, and entered the
         palace, \vhere he took possession of and brought a\vay ,vith him
         all the valuables, presents, curtains of seven-fold \voof, and an
         iron house. l
                  An old book says :-" The iron house \vas on the top of
               the western storied building of Koryo: the woven curtains
               \vere hung in the private chamber of the Koryo King.
            The curtains of seven-fold woof ,vere offered as a present to
         the Emperor; ,vhile to the Oho-omi, Saga, Iname no Sukune,.
         there ,vere sent t\VO suits of armour, two s\vords mounted in gold,
         three copper bells with chasings, t\VO flags variously coloured,
         a beautiful \vornan called Rime 2 [Rime is a name], and also
         her attendant, Atako. Hereupon the Oho-omi at length took
         to him these t\VO \vomen and made them his wives, lodging
         them in the palace of I{aru no Magari.
                 The iron house is in the Temple of Choanji, but \",e do
               not know in \vhat province this temple is. One book
              says :-" 11th year.:c Ohotomo no Sadehiko, along with
              the Land of Pekche, repulsed Y~~ng-h)~ang, King of
XIX. 58.       Koryo, at the capital city of Pi-cllin-nyu."
            Winter, 11th month. Silla sent Envoys to offer presents and
         at the same time to bring tribute. The Envoys found out all
         about the Government being indignant against Silla on
         account of the destruction of Imna, and did not dare to ask
         leave to depart, fearing lest they might be executed. 4 They did
         not return to their own country, and \vere made to rank as
         (J apanese) subjects. These men were the ancestors of the
         present Silla men of Hani-iho in the district of Mishima in the
         province of Settsu.

           1 Probably a shrine in the shape of a small pagoda, used as a receptacle

        for relics, says the H Shiikai " editor.
           2 Or VOlue.

           3 No doubt an error for 21St year.    The" Tongkaln" does not mention
        this war.
          4 See aboYe, XIX. 54.
                                  KIM1\IEI.                                J26

   26th year, SUlllmer, 5th month. Some I{ory6 men, Tu-mu- A.D. 565.
ri-ya-phye and others, emigrated to Tsukushi. The)T were
settled in the province of Yamashiro, and \vere the ancestors
of the present Koryb men of U ne-hara, N ara, and Yamamura.
   28th year. There \vere floods in the districts and provinces, A. D. 56 7.
with famine. In some cases men ate each other. 11utual
assistance was rendered by transporting grain from the
neighbouring districts.
   30th year, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. An edict "vas issued A.D. 569.
as £0110\\1'5 :-" The institution of serfs 1 is a custom of old
standing. But for more than ten years past, there have been
Inan~y \vhose nalnes have been omitted from the lists, and
\vho have avoided their tasks. Let Itsu lItSll ,vas nephe\v of
(5 Chin-ni ~J be sent to revise the lists of the serfs of Shira\vi."
   Summer, 4th lnonth. Itsu revised the serfs of Shira\vi, and
in accordance ,vith the edict, settled the lists, so that land-
families 3 \vere formed. The Emperor, by' \\lay of con1pliment
to Itsu on his success in settling the lists, gave him tIle title of
Shirawi no Obita, and moreover appointed him 1"'adzukahi
under Midzuko [Midzuko is mentioned above~ .-\
   31St ~year, Spring, 3rd month, 1St day'. Iname no Sukune, A.D. 57 0 •
Saga no Oho-omi, died.
   Summer, 4th month, 2nd day. The Emperor made a XIX. 59·
progress to the Palace of Shibagaki in Hatsuse.
   11oshiro, Yenuno no Omi, a man of I<.ashi, came to the
capital and addressed the Emperor, saying :-" Envoys frain
Karyn, suffering b)t reason of the \vinds and ,vaves, lost their
way, and missing their harbour, drifted at the mercy of the
current, until they suddenly reached the shore. This was
concealed b)r the ruler of the district. Therefore I make it
known to Your Majesty."
   The Emperor made an order, saying :-" This is the first
time since our taking over the Imperial functions, now n1any
years ago, that men of Koryo, losing their \\~a)r, have reached the
coast of Koshi. Though suffering from being cast a\vay and
submerged, yet their lives have been preserved. Is not this an
     1  Lit. Rice-field Be.
     2  Apparently a Corean or Chinese name.
     :3  m   P or field· house, i.e. falnilies or groups of cultivators.
      4 XIX. 49.
         88                           NIHONGI.

          instance of the wide extension of wise counsels, of perfect
          virtue majestically displa}?ed, of benign influences universally
          pervasive, of vast blessings far diffused? I.,et the proper
          functionaries erect a hall in the district of Sagaraka in the
          province of Yamashiro, let them cleanse it and render cordial
          entertainment and help."
             In this month the Im.perial carriage arrived back from the
          Palace of Shibagaki in Hatsuse, and Arako, Atahe of the House
          of Eastern Aya,1 and Naniha, I{atsuraki 110 Atahe, were sent to
          Ineet and bring in the Koryo Envo~ys.
             5th month. Katabeko, Kashihade no Omi, was sellt to
          I(oshi to entertain the Koryo Envoys. The Chief Envoy,
          knowing perfectly well that I(ashihade no Omi had been sent
          by the Emperor, addressed Michi no Ushi, the ruler of the
          district of I(oshi, sa)?ing :-" After all, as I suspected, thou art
          not the Emperor. Thou hast prostrated thyself in doing
          obeisance to Kashihade no Omi, \vhich is abundant evidence
          that thou art a subject. And yet before, deceiving me, thou
          didst take the tribute and appropriate it. Let it be promptly
XIX. 60. given back, and \vaste no .,words in palliation of thy conduct."
          I(ashihade no Omi, learning this, sent men to require from
          him the tribute, ,vhich ,vas all gi,·en up, and on returning to
          the capital reported on his mission.
             Autumn, 7th month, 1st day. The I{oryo envoys arrived at
          Afumi.
             This month Saru, I{ose no Omi, and Kishi no Akabato were
          despatched from the Port of Naniha, towing a barge (up the
          river) to Mount Sasanami, \vhere they decorated a boat and
          ,vent to meet them at Mount I~ita ~ in Afumi. I~inally the~y
          brought them into the official residence at I{omahi in
          Yamashiro. Accordingly Komaro, Yamato noAya no Saka no
          Uhe no Atahe, and Ohashi, ~ishikori no Obito, were sent to
          escort them. The I~oryo envo)?s \vere again entertained in the
          official residence of Sagaraka.
A.D. 571.    32nd year, Spring, 3rd month, 5th day'. Sakata, Mimiko no
          Iratsumi was sent on a mission to Silla to demand an
          explanation of the reasons for the destruction of Jmna.
             In this month Kor)yo sent presents and Iike\vise a memorial,

              1   Or Yamato no Aya.               2   Northern 1l1ountain.
                               KI~I~IEI.                    J26

but several tens of days elapsed \vithout their having an
opportunity of presenting it. They were compelled to await a
lucky day.
   Sumn1er, 4th month, 15th day. The Emperor took to his
bed, sick and ill at ease. The Prince Imperial had gone away,
and was not present, but was summoned by a messenger on a
swift horse, and introduced into the bed-chamber. The
Emperor took him by the hand, and gave command to him,
saying :-" Our illness is very grave. That which comes after
devolves on thee. Thou must make war on Silla, and
·establish Imna as a feudal dependency, renewing a relation-
ship like that of a husbann and wife just at it was in former
days. If this be done, in my grave I shall rest contented."
   On this day the Emperor at length died in the inner chamber. XIX. 51.
His years were many.l
   5th month. He "vas temporarily interred at Furuichi in
Kahachi.
   Autumn, 8th month, 1st day. Silla sent as Envoys of con-
dolence Mi-cheul-cha-sil-syo and others to make lament at the
place of temporary interment.
   This month Mi-cheul-cha-sil-syo and the r~st took their
departure.
   9th month. The Emperor was buried in the Misasagi of
Sakahi at Hinokuma.

                  1   SOlne say 62, others 63 or 8 I.
                                             BOOK XX.

                         l'RE E~fPEROR NUNAKURA FUTO-TAMA-SHIKI.
                                                                                     1




                                      (BI-DATSU~            lENNO
                                                      OR

                                      BI1V-DATSU TENNO.)

              THE    Emperor N unakura Futo-tama-shiki \vas the second
              child of the Emperor Ame-kuni-oshi-hiraki-hiro-niha. I-lis
              mother was called the Empress Consort Iha no hime [the
              Empress Consort Iha no hime ,vas a daughter of the Emperor
              Take-o-hiro-kuni-oshi-tateJ. The Emperor \vas not a believer
              in Buddhism, but \\?as fond of literature. a At the age of
              t\venty-nine he \vas raised to the position of Prince Imperial.
              In the fourth month of the thirty-second ~year of his reign the
              Emperor Ame-kuni-oshi-hiraki-hiro-niha died.
A.D.   57 2      1st year, Summer, 4th month, 3rd daY4 The Prince Imperial
              assumed the Irnperial Dignity. The Empress was honoured
              with the title of Grand Empress.
                 In this month the Emperor made his palace at Oho-wi in
              Kudara. 4 lvIononobe no Yuge no l\tIoriya no Ohomuraji was
              continued in his office of Ohomuraji, and Saga no Mumako
              no Sukune was made Oho-omi.
                 5th month, 1st day. The Emperor inquired of the Imperial
              Prince and tIle Oho-omi, saying :-" Where are the !(oryo
              Envoys now?" The Oho-ami answered His Majesty,
              saying :-" 1"'hey" are in the official residerlce of Sagaraka."

                1  N uQakura is the nanle of a place; the rest is literally big-je\\'el-spread.
                2  Clever.                           a i.e. Chinese.
                -i Written ,vith the Chinese characters for Pekche, viz. Ii              Vlt.
                                                                                            It is
              here the name of a place in Kahachi.
                                BIDAT5U.                              J26

The En1peror hearing this ,vas exceedingly vexed, and flushing"
up, exclaimed, saying :_'4 Ho\v sorry I anl! The names of
these Enyoys ,,,ere already announced to the Enlperor, my
deceased father." So he despatched the Ministers to the
official residence of Sagaraka to inspect and take note of the xx. 2.
tribute offered by thenl, and to cause thenl to be sent on to the
capital.
   15th day. The Emperor took the Koryo nleillorial, and
passing it on to the Oho-omi, assen1bled all the scribes and
directed them to read and explain it. At this tin1e all the
scribes for the space of three days were unable to read it.
 No,,? there was one 0 Chin-ni, founder of the falnilyof the
f'una no fubito; who ,vas able to read it and explain its Inean·
ing to the En1peror. Consequently the EITlperor and the
Oho-ol1li, both together, complimented him, saying :-" What
diligence, Chin-ni! Well done, Chin-ni! If thou hadst not
been fond of learning, \vho could have done the interpretation?
From this time for,vard let thy attendance be near Us in the
Palace." After this, an edict \vas issued to the scribes of East
and V\Test,:Z saying :--" How is it that the art whicll ye practise
has come to naught? Though ye are 111any, none of you is
equal to Chin-ni." Nor \vas this all. The nlemorial presented
by I~oryo ,\?as ,vritten on cro,v's feathers, and the characters,
like the feathers, being black, nobody had been able to read
them. Chin-ni accordingly steamed the feathers in the vapour
from boiled rice, and took an impression of them on a piece of
silk, \vhereupon all the characters \\"ere transferred to it, to the
wonder of the Court.
   6th month. The Chief I~oryo Envoy addressed the Associate
Envoys, saying :-" In the time of the Enlperor of Shikishinla,:l
ye, contrary to my advice, allo\ved yourselves to be deceived
by others. You unauthorizedly shared the national tribute,
and \vithout due consideration granted it to mean persons.
Were you not to blame in this? If the King of our country
were to hear of it, he \vould certainly have you executed." The
Associate Envoys then said to one another :-" If on our return

  1 i.e. recorders of ships.  His nan1e sho\vs that he \\"as of Chinese or
Coreau origin.
 2 East l11eans here Yanlato ; \\Test, Kahachi.
 3 KilTIlnei 1"enno, so called fronl his place of residence.
        J26                        NIHONGI.

         to our country the Chief Envoy reveals our misconduct, it will
         be unfortunate for us. It is desirable to slay him secretly,
         and so stop his mouth." The same night their conspiracy
  xx. 3. leaked out, and became kno\vn to the Chief Envoy. He put
         on his clothes, and stealing out alone, stood in the inner court
         of the official residence. He was there not knowing \vhat to
         do, when one of the ruffians carrIe forward \vith a club and
         struck the Chief Envoy on the head, and then went away.
         N ext there came another ruffian, who, facing right opposite
         to the Chief Envoy, struck him on the head and hands and
         then went away. The Chief Envoy remained silent, and stood
         his ground, \viping the blood from his face. Again there came
         another ruffian, who rushed forward with a sword, and having
         stabbed the Chief Envoy in the belly, went away. This time
         the Chief Envoy prostrated himself on the ground in fear, and
         in an attitude of supplication. Afterwards there came another
         ruffian, ,vho killed him, and went away. The next morning,
         the official entertainer Komaro, Yamato no Aya no Saka nq
         Uhe no Atahe, and the others inquired the cause of this. The
         Associate Envoys got up a false story, and said :-" The
         Emperor presented a wife to the Chief Envoy. The Chief
         Envoy was disobedient to the Imperial command and refused
         to accept her. This was a piece of extreme insolence, and
         your servants therefore slevl him on the Emperor's behalf."
         The officials buried him with due ceremony.
            Autumn, 7th month. The Koryo Envoys took their
          departure.
            This year was the year Midzunoye Tatsll (29th) of the
          Cycle.
A.D. 573    2nd year, Summer, 5th month, 2nd da)'. Koryo Envoys
          anchored on the coast of the Sea of Koshi. Their ship was
          wrecked and a great many were drowned. The suspicions of
          the Court were excited by their so frequently losing their way,
          and they were dismissed without entertainment. Accordingly
          Naniha, Kibi no Amabe no Atahe, was sent by the Emperor's
          orders to escort home the Koryo Envoys.
            Autumn, 7th month, 1st day. Naniha and the Karyn
          Envoys met in consultation on the coast of the Sea of Koshi.
          Ihahi, Ohoshima no Obito, and Masa, Saoka no Obito, seamen
          of Naniha, the escort Envoy, were made to go on board the
                                BIDATSU.                                  93
Koryo Envoys' ship, \vhile t\VO I\.ory() men \vere made to
embark in the escort Envoy's ship. Having in this manner
exchanged ships, as a precaution against treachery', they both
set sail together. They had only' gone a fe\v ri, \vhen the
escort Envoy, ~aniha, fearing the \vaves, took the t\VO Koryo
men and flung them into the sea.
   8th month, 14th day'. The escort Envoy, Naniha, returned xx. 4·
and reported the result of his mission, saying :-" The \vhale-
fish of the sea assemble in great numbers and intercept and
de,·our the ships \vith their sculls and oars. N aniha and his
companions fearing to be swallo\ved up by these fishes ,vere
unable to go upon the sea." The Emperor hearing this sa\v
that his language was untruthful, and employed him in one of the
 public offices, 1 not allowing him to return to his own province.
    3rd year, Summer, sth month, 5th cia)T. The IZoryo Envoys A.D. 574·
 anchored on the sea-coast of Koshi.
    Autumn, 7th month, 20th da~y. The Kor~yo Envo)ys entered
 the capital and addressed the Emperor, saying :-" Last year
 thy servants departed, in company' \vith the escort Envoy, in
 order to return to their own countr)~. Formerly \vhen thy
 servants arrived at their frontier State,:: thy servants' frontier
 State entertained Ihahi, Ohoshima no Obito, and his com-
 panions in accordance \vith the ceremony due to Envoy~s, and
 the I~ing of Koryo treated them \vith specially cordial civility.
 Not\yithstanding this, the ship of the escort Envoy had not
 arrived up till no\\', and therefore he has respectfully again sent
  Envoys along \vith Ihahi and his companions to request infor-
  mation as to \vhy our Envoys ~ have not come." \\Then the
  Emperor heard this he enumerated Naniha's offences, saying:
  - " Thou art doubly! guilty, first for having deceived the Court,
  and secondly, for having drowned the Envoys of a neighbouring
  State. These are heinous crimes, and thou canst not be
  released." He was therefore sentenced to punishment. 4
     \Vinter, loth month, 9th day·. The Oho-omi, Soga no
  ~lumako, \vas sent to the province of Kibi to extend the Shirawi

   1  As a slave.
   2  Note the fiction of Koryo being a dependency of Japan.
   3 This 11111St be taken as referring to the t\VO Inen \\'h0111 Naniha thre\v
 overboard.
   -I No doubt of death.

   VOL. II.                                                          H
        94                              NIHONGI.

          ~Iiyake and the staff of serfs attached to it.    He accordingly
          took the register of serfs and handed it over to Itsu, Shirawi
          no Fubito.
             11th day. By an Imperial order, the title of Tsu no Fubito I
          \vas granted to Ushi, 2 younger brother of 0 Chin-ni, Funa no
          Fubito.:J
  xx. 5. 11th month. Silla sent Envoys to offer tribute.
A.D. 575.    4th year, Spring, 1st month, 9th day. Hirohime, daughter
          of Prince Nlate of Okinaga, was raised to the rank of Empress
          Consort. She had one son and two daughters. The eldest
          \vas called the Imperial Prince Oshizaka Hikohito no Ohine
           [otherwise the Imperial Prince Maroko] . The second was
          called the Imperial Princess Sakanobori. The third was called
          the Imperial Princess Uji no Shitsukahi.
             In this month a consort was appointed named Womunagimi
          no Otoshi,oI the daughter of Nakatsu kimi, Kasuga no Omi.
           [She ,vas otherwise called Kusu-kimi no Iratsuko.] She bore
          three sons and one daughter. The first was called the Imperial
          Prince Naniha; the second was called the Imperial Prince
          I(asuga; the third "vas called the Imperial Princess Kuwada;
          tIle fourth was called the Imperial Prince Ohomata. The next,
          an Uneme named Unako no Otoshi, daughter of \\Tokuma, Ise
          no Ohoka no Obito, gave birth to the Imperial Princess Futo
          hime [otherwise called the Imperial Princess SakurawiJ and
          the Imperial Princess Nukade hime [also called the Imperial
          Princess Tamura] .
  xx. 6. 2nd month,7th day. The Oho-omi, Miimako no Sukune,
          returned to the capital and reported the result of his mission
          respecting the ?vIiyake.
             3rd month, 11th day. Pekche sent envoys to offer tribute,
          luore in quantity than in ordinary years. The Emperor, inas-
          much as Silla had not yet established Imna, gave orders to the
          Imperial Prince and to the Oho-onli, saying :-" Be not remiss
          in the matter of Imna."
             Summer, 4th month, 6th day. The Kishi, I{anako, was sent
          on a mission to Silla, the Kishi, Itahiko, to Imna, and the Kishi,
          Wosa-hiko/ to Pekche.
          1 Port.. recorder.           ~ The ox.           a i.e. Shipping-recorder.
          -4This is the rendering- of the Interlinear Kana version.
          ~ \Vosa means interpreter. Kishi was originally a Corean title.
                                     Blf)ATSU.                              95
   6th month. Silla sent envo~ys to offer tribute, more In
quantity than usual. They' also sent tribute for the four to,vn-
ships of Ta-ta-ra, Su-na-ra, H\va-tha, and Pal-k,vi.
   In t his ~?ear) by command, the diviners di,·ined a site for the
d\'gellings of Prince Amabe and Prince ItoYtl'i. The divination
,vas propitious, and eventually a palace \vas constructed at
Wosada; \yhich ,YUS called the Palace of Sakidama.
   Winter, 11th month. The Empress Consort Hirohime died.
   5th year, Spring, 3rd month, loth du)'l'. The functionaries A.D. 57 6 .
petitioned that an Empress Consort should be appointed. By
the Emperor's command To)Oomike KashikiY'a hime no
Mikoto 2 ,vas appointed Empress Consort. She bore t\VO sons
and five daughters. The first ,vas called the Imperial Princess
Uji na Kahitako [otherwise called the Inlperial Princess Uji
no ShitsukahiJ. She ,vas '\gedded to Sho-toku, the heir to the xx. ;
throne. The second ,,"as called the Imperial Prince Takeda;
the third \vas called the Imperial Princess '\"'oharida. She
,vas \vedoeo to the Imperial Prince Hiko-hito no Ohine.:{ The
fourth was called the Inlperial Princess U mori [other,vise
called the Irnperial Princess Karu no mori]; the fifth was
called the I mperiaI Prince 'Vohari ; the sixth ,vas called the
Imperial Princess Tame. She was \vedded to the Emperor
Okinaga tarashi-hi hiro-nuka. 4 The seventh ,vas called the
Imperial Princess Sakura\vi no Yumibari.
   6th )'ear, Spring, 2nd month, 1st da~y. By Imperial com- A.O. ;77
mand there \"ere established a Sun-\vorship l~e and a private
Be. t)
  Sumnler, 5th month, 5th day. Prince Oho\\'ake and \Vag-uro
no I{ishi \vere sent to govern the Land of pekche.
       The representatives of the Crown, \vho by Imperial com-
     mand were sent on service to the three Han, called them-
     selves $, meaning that theyl' governed Corea. This was
     doubtless an ancient rule. They resembled what are now
     called Envoy's. This explanation applies to all other pas-
     sages also. I t is not clear ,vhat ,vas the extraction of
     })rince Oho,vake.

         J    The Interpreter's field.
         ~ After\\·ards the reigning Empress Suiko Tenno.
         :i   He-r half-brother.                      4 J0111ei Tenno.

         5    rrhis is explained to mean" for the Enlpress's service. i '
         J26                               NII-IONGI.

              Winter, 11th month, 1st day. The King of the Land of
            Pekche presented to the Emperor, through the returning Envoys
            Prince Ohowake and his companions, a number of volumes of
           relig-ious books,l with an ascetic, ~ a meditative monk, 3 a nun, a
           reciter of mantras,4 a maker of Buddhist images, and a temple
           architect, six persons in all. Eventually there was founded the
  xx. 8. Temple of Prince Ohowake of Naniha.
A.D. 57 8.    7th year, Spring, 3rd month, 5th day. The Imperial Princess
           Uji was made to attend on the shrine of Ise, but an intrigue
           \vhich she had with the Imperial Prince Ikenobe having come
           to light, this appointment was cancelled.
A.D. 579.     8th year, Winter, loth month. Silla sent Chi-cheul-chong
           Nami 5 to bring tribute. At the same time he sent a Buddhist
           image.
A.D. 580.     9th year, Summer, 6th month. Silla sent Ato Nami and
           Chil-syo Nami to offer tribute, but they were dismissed without
           its being received.
A.D. 581.     loth year, Spring, Intercalary 2nd month. Several thousand
           Yemishi showed hostility on the frontier. 6 Accordingly their
           chiefs [they were very hairy men] Ayakasu 7 and others were
           sent for, and the Emperor gave them his commands, saying:-
           "You Yemishi! In the reign of the Emperor Oho-tarashi-
           hiko 8 those of you whom it was meet to kill were put to death,
           and those who deserved forgiveness were pardoned. We n0'Y,
           in observance of this precedent, intend to put to death the ring-
           leaders." Hereupon Ayakasu and the others were filled with
           fear and awe. They went down into the middle stream of the
  xx. 9. Hatsuse river, and with their faces turned towards Mount
           Mimoro rinsed 9 their IIlouths and made oath, saying :-" We
           Yenlishi promise that from this time forward, we, our children,
           and our children's children [there is an old saying, ' The chil-
            1 A later writer says that there \vere 200 vols., Buddhist Sutras being

        aOlong them.
          2 Monks \vho practise vinaya.         Vlde Eitel, p. 202, 2nd edition.
          :t Yogi.     vi·de Eitel, p. 20<).                 ~ Buddhist magic spells.
          =» Here and belo\v Nami may be a IJ\istake for Naola, the Corean title of

        rank. The characters used for nli and Ina closely resemble each other.
          •; I t is to be remembered that all the northern part of the main island of
        Japan, including the province of Mutsu and De,va, were at this time in Aino
        possession.
           j A Japanese name.             8 Keik6 Tenn6.        !. As a purifying ceremony.
                               BIDATSIJ.                  9i
 dren of our body eighty times continued '] will serve the
 Celestial Gate with sincerity of heart. If we break this oath,
 may all the Gods of Heaven and Earth, and also the spirits of
 the Emperors, destroy our race."
    11th year, Winter, loth month. Silla sent Ato Nami and A.D. 582 •
 Sil-syo N ami to render tribute. They were dismissed, their
 tribute not being accepted.
    12th year, Autumn, 7th month, 1st day. The Emperor A.D. 583.
 nlade an order, saying :-" In the reign of the late Emperor,
 my father, Silla destroyed our inner Mi:rake State.
          In the 23rd year of the Emperor Ame-kuni oshi-hiraki
       hiro-niha, Imna was destroyed by Silla. Therefore it is
       said that Silla destroyed our inner Miyake State.
    Our father, the late Emperor, devised n1easures for restoring
 Irona, but he died without carrying them out, and did not
 fulfil his purpose. It therefore devolves on Us to render
 assistance to his divinely admirable polic.y, and to restore
 Imna again. The Talsol, IlIa, son of the Arisateung,
 Miyakko of the Province of Ashigita in Hi,l now resident in
 Pekche, is a wise and brave man. Therefore we wish to
consult with him." Accordingly he sent Oshikatsu, Ki no
 kuni no Miyakko, and Hashima, Kibi no Amabe no Atahe, to
summon him from Pekche.
   Winter, loth month. Oshikatsu, Ki no Kuni no Miyakko,
and his colleague returned from Pekche and reported the result
of their mission to the Court, saying :-" The King of the
 Land of Pekche grudged IlIa and \vould not consent to allow
him to come up."
   This year, Hashima, Kibi no Amabe no Atahe, was again
sent to summon IlIa from Pekche. Hashima, having gone to
Pekche, wished first of all to see IlIa privately.       He was
standing all by himself facing the door of his house, ,,,hen xx. 10.
there suddenly came from within the house a Corean woman
who addressed him in the Corean language, saying :-" Radix
tua ineat in meam radicem," and then went away into the
house. Hashima perceived her meaning, and followed in after
her. Upon this IlIa came to meet him, and taking him by the
hand, made him take his place on a seat. He then secretly

                    1   Includes Higo and Hizen.
       98                             NIHONGI.

        informed hinl, saying :-" I have received private information
        that the I{ing of the Land of Pekche is suspicious of the
        Celestial Court, fearing that if I ,vere sent, I might after\vards
        be detained and not allo\ved to return. He is therefore
        reluctant, and will not consent to offer me. It ,vould be ,veIl,
        when the Imperial commands are delivered, to make a show
        of severity, and to insist peremptoril~y on summoning me."
        Hashima accordingly follo\ved this plan, and required IlIa
        from the King of the Land of pekche. He stood in awe
        of the Celestial Court, and, not daring to disobey the
        Imperial message, sent IlIa to the Emperor. The Eun-sol,l
        Tok-ni, Yo-no, and Kanochi, the Associate Official the
        Tbk-sol,~ Chha-kan-tok, \vith a good number of steersmen
        and sailors, together \vith IlIa and his companions, arrived
        at the l\fiyake of Kojima in Kibi. The Court sent Oho-
        tomo no Nukadeko no Muraji to express sympathy for their
        fatigues. After\vards Daibu 3 \vere sent to the official residence
        at N aniha to ,vait upon IlIa. At this time IlIa, clad in armour,
        and riding on horseback, came up to the gate.-l Then
        advancing in front of the Hall of Audience, he did his obei-
        sances when advancing and retiring in a kneeling posture, and
        sighing bitterly, said :--" In the reign of the Emperor who
        ruled the \vorld from the Palace of Hinokuma,& rn)' Lord Oho-
        tomo no I~anamura no Ohomuraji sent Arisateung, Hi no
         Ashigita no :rvliyakko, and Yugehi 6 of the Osaka Be'; bey·ond
         the sea, on the service of the State. Thy servant, the son of
         the Arisateung, the Talsol IlIa, having heard the Imperial
         summons, ,vith fear and a\\7e presents himself at th)~ Court. ,-
         He accordingly took off his armour and delivered it to the
         Emperor. An official lodging ,vas built for him at Kuha no
         ichi in Ato, where he ,vas made to dwell, and provided \vith
         everything which he desired. Afterwards Abe no Me no Onli,
xx. II. Mononobe no Niheko no Muraji, and Ohotomo no Nuka-
         deko no Muraji were sent to inquire of IlIa respecting the
         government of the country'. IlIa answered and said :-" The
         Emperor's aim in governing the Empire is to ensure the
         1 3rd rank.          2 4th rank.      3 A general ternl for high officials.
         oj Leading to the Hall of Audience.
         :) Senk"'a '"fenno.                   6   Archer.
         1 'rhe executioners.
                                  BIDATSU.                                    99
protection and nourishment of the people. \Vh)~ should he
hastily stir up warfare ,vhich ,viII redound to their destruction?
Therefore now having made all, from his counsellors, viz. the
Omi, Muraji, and Miyakko of both kinds [the Kuni no ~1iyakko
and the Torno no rvIiyakko ,\vhose duty it is to serve the
Court, do',vn to the people, without exception, to enjoy
prosperity, let him cause them to want for nothing. \Vhen
this has been continued for three years, \vhen food has
been made abundant, and arms plentiful, the people being
dealt with by means of gladness, will fear neither ,vater nor
fire, and \vill join with the Emperor in commiserating the
troubles of the country. Thereafter let ships be built in
numbers and stationed in order at all the ports, so that visitors
froin abroad ma)T view them and be filled with dread. There
should then be sent a capable Envoy to Pekche to summon
the King of that country. If he does not come, let his
Prime Minister or a Prince be summoned to appear. Their
hearts will in that case naturally be filled \vith submissive
reverence, and they ought then to be called to an account
for their misconduct" [the crime of delaying to establish
 Imna] .
    Moreover he addressed (a message to) the Emperor.
saying :-" The people of Pekche talk of a plan according to
which it is intended to request (a settlement in) Tsukushi
for 300 ships (of emigrants?). If they reall)' make this
request, I advise Your Majesty to pretend to grant it. Pekche
will then wish to create a new country, and ,viiI certainly put
the women and children on ship-board and come \vith them
 in advance. The Government, when this time is at hand,
 should place in ambush in Iki and Tsushima plenty of troops,
 and, awaiting their arrival, slay them. On the other hand,
 guard against being yourselves over-reached, and solidly build
 fortresses in all the strong positions." 1
    Hereupon one of the Eun-sol and the Associate, on the
 eve of their departure for their own country ~an old book
 says :-" One Enn-sol and one Associate"~ held secret com-
 munication with Tok-ni and others, saying :-" If you, having
 allowed sufficient time for us to get past Tsukushi, ,viII secretl)T

 1   All this seems great nonsense.   It has puzzled the native ·colnl11entators.
       100                              NIHONGI.

       kill IlIa, we will report the matter fully to the King, \vho ,viii
xx. 12. confer on )TOU high official rank, so that you and )'our families
        will leave prosperit)T to your descendants." Tok-ni and Yo-no
        both agreed. The Associate Official and the others at length
        started on their journey to Chika. 1 Hereupon IlIa removed
        from the village of!(uha-ichi to the official residence of Naniha.
        Tok-ni and his colleague conspired together day and night how
        they ,,,,,ere to slay him. No\v IlIa's body ,vas radiant like a
        flame of fire,~ and therefore Tbk-ni and the others were afraid,
        and did not kill him. At length, during- the interlune of the
        12th month, they a"Taited his loss of radiance and slew him.
        But IlIa came to life again, and said :-" This is the doing
        of our slaves, and not of Silla."          This is said because
        there were at this time Silla Envoys "(at the Court).] Having
        thus spoken, he died.
           The Emperor gave command to Niheko no Ohomuraji and
        Nukadeko no ~Iuraji, and had hinl buried in front of the Hill
        of the western boundary of W ogohori. His wife, children,
        and sailors \\'ere made to live at Ishikaha. d Hereupon Oho-
        tomo no Nukadeko no Muraji counselled, saying :-" If
        they are nlade to live all together at one place, I fear it may
        give rise to trouble." Accordingly the \vife and children ,vere
         made to dwell at I~udara 4- mura in Ishikaha, and the sailors
        at Ohotomo no mura in Ishikaha. Tbk-ni and the other ,vere
        arrested and kept at Ada-mura in Lo\ver I<udara, where a
         number of Daibu were sent to investigate the matter. Tok-ni
         and the other confessed their guilt, saying :-" Indeed it ,vas
         the Elin-sol and the Associate who by their instructions made
         us do this. \Ve, being underlings, did not dare to refuse."
xx. 13. They were accordingly cast into prison, and the Daibu reported
         the result of their mission to the Court. i\ messenger was
         sent to Ashigita;) to summon all IlIa's household, and Tok-ni
         and the other were delivered to them to fix their punishulent
         at their discretion. Then the Kimi of Ashigita took them,
         and having slain them all, cast away their bodies on the Island
         of }.tlimejima. ~l\'fimejima is perhaps Hime-jima.J IlIa ,vas
          1  In Hizen.                      ~ II is 8, i.e. sun.
          :iIlIa's history reselnbles sOlne\vhat that of I~jnl Ok-kiun in our o\vn day.
          4 i.e. Pekche.    In Kahachi.
          d IlIa was of the Ashigita fa111ily.   See abo\·c, P.97.
                                 BIDATSUe                                101

removed for internlent at f\shigita. Later the coast people
reported that the Eun-sol's ship had met \vith a storm and
foundered, and that the Associate's ship had not been able
to return until it had first drifted to Tsushima.
   13 th year, Spring, 2nd month, 8th day. Kitahiko, Naniha A.D. 584.
no Kishi, ,vas sent to Silla. He at length arrived at Imna.
   Autumn, 9th nlonth. I{afuka no Omi ~the personal name is
wanting], \vho had come from Pekche, 11ad a stone image of
Miroku,l and Saheki no Muraji [the personal name is wanting]
an image of Buddha This year Saga no Mumako no Sukune,
having asked for these t\\'o Buddhist images, sent Shiba Tatt6,~
Kurabe no Sukuri, and Hida, Ikenobe no Atahe, in all directions
to search out persons \vho practiseti (Buddhism). U pan this
he only found in the province of Harima a man named Hye-
phyon of Koryo,:; \vho from a Buddhist priest had become a xx. 14·
layman again. So the Oho-omi made him teacher, and caused
him to receive Shima, the daughter of Shiba Tatt6, into religion.
She took the name of Nun Zen-shin [twelve years of age].
Moreover he received into religion t\VO pupils of the Nun
Zen-shin. One was Toyome, the daughter of Ayabito" no Yaho.
She took the name of Nun Sen-zoo The other was Ishime,
daughter of Nishikori Tsubu. She took the name of Nun Rei-
zen. Miimako no Sukune, still in accordance \vith the Law of
Buddha, reverenced the three nuns, and gave them to Hida no
Atahe and Tatt6, with orders to provide them with food and
clothing. He erected a Buddhist Temple on the east side of
his dwelling, in which he enshrined the stone image of Miroku.
He insisted on the three nuns holding a general meeting to
partake of maigre fare. a At this time Tatt() found a Buddhist

   1 In Sanskrit Maitreya, the expected l\ie~siah of the 13uddhists.      Vid e
Eitel, p. 92.
  2 A Chinese or Corean natne.              3 In Japanese KOllla no Keibin.

  4 Ayabito is writteniI   A, i.e. a man of Han (China). Here it is a proper
natTIe, though no doubt indicating a Chinese ancestry.
  ;) The Chinese character for " maigre fare" is If. This the Interlinear
Kana renders here and belo\v in many places by Ogami, i.e. prayer. That
the meetings here referred to were practically for religious services is
unquestionable, and \ve ha'"e seen above, Vol. I. p. 41, that this character
\vhen used in connection ,vith Shinto, is equivalent to "\vorship," although
prinlarily meaning" religious abstinence." H ere the proper meaning is, I
SUblUit, " the vegetable diet of Buddhist priests.;' A few lines further do\\en
        102                              NIHONGI.

         relic on the food of abstinence, and presented it to Mumako no
         Sukune. Miimako no Sukune, by' \vay of experiment, took the
         relic, and placing it on the middle of a block of iron, beat it
         \vith an iron sledge-hammer, which he flourished aloft. The
         block and the sledge-hamn1er were shattered to atoms, but the
 xx. 15. relic could not be crushed. Then the relic was cast into \vater,
         when it floated on the \vater or sank as one desired. In con-
         sequence of' this, ~1iimako no Sukune, Ikenobe no Hida, and
         Shiba Tatto held faith in Buddhism and practised it unremit-
         tingly. lvIiimako no Sukune built another Buddhist Temple
         at his house in Ishikaha. From this arose the beginning of
         13uddhism.
A.D 585.    14th year, Spring, 2nd month, 15th day. Soga no Oho-omi,
         Mllmako no Sukune, erected a pagoda north of the Hill of Ohono,
         and having held a general meeting to partake of maigre food,
         d€posited the relic obtained by Tatt6 on the top of the pillar. l
            24th day. Saga no Oho-omi took ill. Having made
         inquiry of a diviner,2 the diviner answered and said :_H It is a
         curse sent by \viII of the Buddha ~ worshipped in thy father's
         time." Soga no Oho-omi accordingly sent a young man of his
         family to report to the Emperor the nature of the divination.
         The En1peror gave orders, saying :-" In accordance \vith the
         \vords of the diviner, let thy father's Gods be worshipped." The
         Oho-omi, in obedience to the Emperor's commands, worshipped
         the stone image, and pra~yed that his life might be prolonged.
         At this time there \vas a pestilence rife in the land, and nlany
         of the people died.
            3rd month, 1st day. Mononobe no Yugehi no Moriya no
         Ohomuraji and Nakatomi no Katsumi no Daibu addressed the
         Emperor, saying :-" Why hast thou not consented to follow
         thy servants' counsel? Is not the prevalence of pestilence from
         the reign of the late Emperor thy father down to thine, so that

        \ve have  If    1(, "abstinence food," Lenten fare, as we should say, and
        C;iles (p. 18) renders If      ft "to give n1eals to priests." Th is is a ,veIl·
        known duty of pious Buddhists. In the history of Corea there is frequent
        ll1cntion of large nUlnbers of priests being entertained by the kings froul
        tin1 e to time.
           1 i.e. the central pillar round ,vhich a pag-oda is built.

           ~ U rabe, or native aug-urs.
           :s The \vord for Buddha is 1Mi jl)l, lluddha-Kalui.
                                 BII)ATSU.                               1°3
the nation is in danger of extinction, owing absolutely to the
establishment of the exercise of the Buddhist religion by Soga
no Omi ?" The Emperor gave command, saying :-" Manifestly
so: let Buddhism be discontinued.'~
   30th day. I\lononobe no Yugehi no ~loriya no Ohomuraji
\vent himself to the Temple, and sitting on a chair,l cut down xx. 16.
the pagoda,: which he then set fire
to and burnt. He likewise burnt
the image of Buddha and the
Temple of Buddha. Having done
so, he took the remains of the
image of Buddha which were left
from the burning and had them
flung into the ~ aniha canal. On
this day there was wind and rain
\vithout any clouds, and the
Ohomuraji had on his rain-coat.
He upbraided Mumako no Sukune
and those who followed him in
the exercise of religion, and made
them feel shame and contrition                 . ..\      ~gura.


of heart.      Moreover he sent
Mimoro [also called Oruke], Saheki no Miyakko, to summon
Zen-shin and the other nuns provided for by lVIumako no
Sukune. So ~I iimako no Sukune did not dare to disobey this
command, but with grief and lamentation called forth the nuns
and delivered them to Mimoro. The officials accordingly took
away from the nuns their three garments':i imprisoned them
and flogged them at the road-station of Tsubaki no ichi.
  The Emperor, with the view of establishing Imna,
appointed as his Envoy Prince Nlimiko of Sakata. Just at this

   1 Chair here and elsewhere is in the original represented by two Chinese

characters which luean "Tartar couch.;' The Japanese \vord which the
\vriter had in mind \vas no doubt agura, "leg·~eat," which is the rendering of
the Interlinear Kana.
   2 The Ineaning may be that he sat on a chair to superintend the worknlen

 ,vho \"ere employed for this purpose.
   3 The three   priestly garillents, viz. the Samghati, reaching from the
shoulders to the knees, the U ttara Sanlghati, a sort of overcoat, and the
Kachaya (Kesa in Japanese), a coloured mantle. Vile Eitel, sub vocibus.
        1°4                             NIHONGI.

         time the Emperor and the Ohomuraji \vere suddenl)' afflicted
         with sores, and he was therefore after all not sent. The
         Emperor gave command to the Imperial Prince Tachibana no
         Toyohi, saying :-" The injunctions of the late Emperor my
        father must not be disregarded: the Government of Imna
         must be diligently put in order."
            Again the Land was filled with those who \vere attacked
        with sores and died thereof. The persons thus afflicted with
        sores said :-" Our bodies are as if the)r \vere burnt, as if the)~
        were beaten, as if the)r were broken," and so lanlenting,
        they died. Old and young said privately to one another,
        "Is this a punishment for the burning of the Image of
        Buddha? "
           Summer, 6th month. Miimako no Sukune addressed the
xx. 17. Emperor, saying :-" Thy servant's disease has not yet been
        healed; nor is it possible for succour to be afforded me unless
        by the power of the three precious things." 1 Hereupon the
        Emperor commanded Miimako no Sukune, saying :-" Thou
        mayest practise the Buddhist religion alone, but discontinue
        it in so far as others are concerned." So the three nuns were
        given back to Mumako no Sukune, who received them with
        rejoicing, lamenting their unexampled misfortunes, and bowing
        down his head in their honour. He built them a Temple
        anew, into which he welcomed them, and provided them ,,'ith
        sustenance.
                One book says :-" Mononobe no Yugehi no Moriya no
              Ohomuraji, Oho-miwa no Sakahe no Kimi and Nakatomi
              no Ihare no Muraji conspired together to destroy the
              Buddhist religion. They wanted to burn the Temple and
              pagoda, and also to throwaway the Buddhist images.
              Mumako no Sukune opposed this project, and would not
              agree to it."
           Autumn, 8th month, 15th day. The Emperor's disease
        having become more and more inveterate, he died in the
        Great Hall. At this time a Palace oftelnporary interment was
        erected at Hirose. Mumako no Sukune delivered a funeral
xx. 18. oration with his sword girded aD. Mononobe no Yugehi no
         Moriya no Ohomuraji burst out laughing, and said :-" He is
         1   The Triratna, i.e. Buddha, the Law and the Priesthood.   Vide Eitel, sub
       voce.
                               BID.~TSU.                            105

like a sparroV'/ pierced by a hunting-shaft."     Next Yugehi no
Moriya nt) Ohomuraji, ,,,ith trembling hands and legs,
deliyered his funeral oration. The Oho-ami, ~Iumako no Sukune,
laughed and said :-" He ought to have bells hung upon him."
 FraIn this small beginning the t~vo Ministers conceived a hatred
of each other. Sakahe, Miwa no I~imi sent Hayato for the
protection of the Courtyard of the temporary tomb. The
 Imperial Prince Anahobe/ \vho ,vished to possess himself of
the empire, fle,v into a rage, and declared, saying :-" \\Thy do )?e
serve the Court of a dead King, and do no service ,,,,here the
 Iiving King is? "

        ] Younger brother of the Elnperor by a different n10ther.
                             BOOK XXI.

               THE EMPEROR TACHIBANA NO TOYOHI.}


                        (YOJl;fE/2     TENNO.)

THE Emperor Tachibana no Toyohi was the fourth child of
the Emperor Ame-kuni oshi-hiraki hito-niha.3 His mother's
name was Kitashi hime. The Emperor believed in the Law of
Buddha and reverenced the Way of the Gods. 4 In the four-
teenth year of his reign, Autumn, the 8th month, the Emperor
N unakura futo-tama-shiki died.
   9th month, 5th day. The Emperor assumed the Imperial
dignity, and made his capital at Ihare, calling it the Palace of
N amitsuki in Ikenobe. a Saga no M umako no Sukune was made
Oho-omi, and Mononobe no Yugehi no ~Ioriya no Ohomuraji
was made Ohomuraji, both as before.
  .19th day. The Emperor made command, saying :-etc.,
etc. 6-appointing the Imperial Princess Nukade hime to the
charge of the Shrine of Ise and to attend to the worship of the
Sun-goddess.
         This Imperial Princess, from the time of this Emperor
      until the reign of the Empress Kashikiya hime,7 attended
      to the divine service of the Sun-goddess. She then retired
   1 This nalue Ineans orange abundance-sun.     Tachibana is, however, here
the nallle of a village in Yalnato.
  2 Yo means to use, enlploy; ll1ei, brightness.         3 Kinlll1ei Tenn6.

  4 Shinto.      m.
               fill       The first time this phrase is found. The" Yih-
king" has, "The sage frames his doctrine by the Vl ay of the (;ods, and
the Empire accepts it."
  .; Province of Valuato.
  6 The author olnits the \vords of the edict, and only gives its general

purport.
  1 Suiko Tenn6.
                                    )(6~IEI.                                1°7
        of her o\vn accord to Katsuraki, and there died.   See the
      reign of the Empress Kashikiya hime. One book says:-
      " Having attended to the ",rorship of the Sun-goddess for
      the space of thirty-seven years, she then retired of her own
      accord and died."
   1st year, Spring, 1st month, 1St day. The Imperial Princess A.I) 586.
                                                                   XXI 2.
 Anahobe no Hashibito was appointed Empress Consort. l She
 bore four sons. The first was called the Imperial Prince
 ~liinla)rado 2 [also called Mimito 3 Shotoku/ or as some have it
Toyoto-min1i, Great King of the Law, or again Ivlaster King of
the I.Jaw]. This Imperial Prince at first lived at I(amitsu
miya.& Afterwards he removed to Ikaruga in the reign of the
 Empress Toyomike Kashikiya bime, where he occupied the
Eastern Palace,6 and discharged the duties of Emperor, being
associated \vith her in the management of all matters of
administration, as is stated in the history of the En1press Toyo-
mike Kashikiya hime. The second was called the Imperial
Prince Kume; the third was called the I mperial Prince Yeguri ;
the fourth was called the Imperial Prince MamutaJ Ishikina,
daughter of Saga no Oho-omi, Iname no Sukune, was appointed
a Consort. She bore the Imperial Prince Tame [also called
the Imperial Prince Toyora]. Hiroko, daughter of Iharnura,
Katsuraki no Atahe, bore one son and one daughter. The son
was called the Imperial Prince Maroko; he was the ancestor
of the Kimi of Tahema. The daughter was called the Imperial
Princess N ukade hime. She was during three generations in XXI. 3.
the service of the Sun-goddess.
   Summer, 5th month. The Imperial Prince Anahobe tried
to force his way into the Palace of temporary interment in
order to ravish the Empress Consort Kashikiya hime. s But
the favourite l\linister, Sakahe, Miwa no Kimi, called out the

  1   She \vas also a daughter of Kinllnei Tennn, by a different Inother.
  ~ See belo\\', 1st year of Suiko's reign, for the reason of this nalne.
   3 Quick-ear.

   .. Sagely-virtue. This is the renowned Shotoku Daishi, the real founder
of Buddhisll1 in Japan.
  ;) The Upper Palace.                   6 i.e. the Heir Apparent's quarters.
  7 Or :\lata.
  8 ~rhe Enlpress Do\vager.    The 1110tive \vas probably not lust, but ambition.
COlupare the silnilar case of Jimnlu Tenno's \vido\v.
        lo8                             NllfONGI.

        guards, \vho firmly fastened the Palace Gate, alld resIsting his
        entrance, would not let him in. The Imperial Prince Anahobe
        demanded of them, saying :-" Who is it that is here?" The
        guards answered and said :-" Sakahe, Miwa no Kimi, is here."
        Seven times he shouted at them to open the gate, but they
        steadily refused to admit him. Hereupon the Imperial Prince
        Anahobe addressed the Oho-omi and the Ohomuraji, saying:
        - " Sakahe is incessantly insulting me. In the funeral eulogy
        delivered b:r him at the Court of temporary interment he
        s3.id :--' Thy Court shall not be left desolate, but shall be kept
        pure as the surface of a mirror, and thy servant will preserve
        peace in dutiful service to thee.' This is an insult. At this
        moment there are many young men of the Emperor's family,
        and there are two Chief Ministers present. Who has any right
        wantonly to monopolize talk of dutiful service? Moreover
        when I ,vished to see the interior of the place of temporary
        interment, I was prevented, and not allowed to enter. Seven
        times I myself called out, 'Open the gate,' but there was no
        answer. I request that I may be allowed to put hinl to death."
        The t\VO Chief Ministers 1 said :-" Be it as thou hast com-
        manded." Upon this, the Imperial Prince Anahobe, while
        secretly planning to make himself ruler of the Empire, falsel)'
        gave out that his object was to kill Sakahe no Kimi. At length,
        along with Mononobe no Moriya no Ohomuraji, he led troops
        with which they surrounded Ikenobe in Ihare. This having
        come to the knowledge of Sakahe no Kimi, he concealed him-
        self on Mount Mimoro. That day, at midnight, he came awa)T
        stealthily from the mountain and hid in the hinder 2 palace,
         [meaning the Empress Kashikiya hime's country-house. It
        was called the Palace of Tsubaki ichi]. Relatives of Sakahe
XXI. 4- named Shiratsutsumi and Yokoyama told where Sakahe no
        I{imi was, and the Imperial Prince Anahobe straightway sent
        to Moriya no Ohomuraji [one book says :-" The Imperial Princes
        Anahobe and Hatsusebe having consulted together, sent to
        Moriya no Ohomuraji "], saying to him :-" Thou must go and
        slay Sakahe no Kimi, and likewise his two children." The Oho-
        muraji at length went off in command of an armed force. Saga
          1*      C! is here evidently not Oho-onli, for one of them \vas not an Oho-
       oJrli, but an Obomuraji. It has the more general sense of Chief Minister.
          2 i.e. the Elnpress's palace.
                                   YO:\IEI.                                1°9
 no Miimako no Sukune, having heard from an outside source of
this conspiracy, went to the place where the Imperial Prince
was. He accordingly arrived before the gate ~the gate of the
 Imperial Prince's house is meant -: ,and finding him on the
point of going to the place where the Ohomuraji was, remon-
strated with him, saying :-" A ruler does not approach a
criminal. Thou shouldst not go thyself." The Imperial
 Prince would not listen to him, but \vent. Mumako no Sukune
forthwith departed in his train, and arrived at Ihare. There
he urgently remonstrated with him, and the Prince yielded to
his remonstrances and stopped. In this place, accordingly, he
remained seated on a chair and \vaited for the Ohomuraji. A
good while later the latter arrived with his troops and reported
the result of his commission, saying :-" I have executed Sakahe
and the others." [One books says :-" The Imperial Prince
went in person and shot them dead."] Hereupon Mumako no
Sukune broke into bitter lamentations, saying :-" Civil dis-
order in the Empire is not far off." The Ohomuraji hearing
this, answered and said :-" Thy position is that of a small
minister; 1 thou dost not know."
       This Sakahe, Miwa no Kimi, \vas a favourite of the
     Emperor Wosada,2 and he was charged \vith all matters
     both internal and external. In consequence of this the
     Empress-consort Kashikiya hime and Milmako no Sukune
     both conceived enmity against the Imperial Prince
     Anahobe.
   This year was the year Hinoye Mtima (43rd) of the Cycle.
   2nd year, Spring, 4th month, 2nd day. The Emperor per- A.D. 58 7-
formed the ceremony of tasting the new rice :I on the river-bank
of Ihare. On this day the Emperor took ill and returned to
the Palace. All the Ministers ,vere in attendance. The
Emperor addressed them, saying :-" It is Our desire to give
OUf adherence to the three precious things.          Do :ye Our
Ministers advise upon this." All the Ministers entered the
Court and consulted together. Mononobe no Mori)ya no Oho-
muraji and Nakatomi no Katsumi no Muraji opposed the XXI. 5-

  1  Alluding to his title of Oho-omi or Great 1\1 inister.
  2  Bidatsu Tenno.
  3 Nihi-nan1e.     See above, Vol. I. p_ 86. It ,vas unusual to celebrate this
festival in spring.
  VOL. II.                                                           I
       110                             N II-IONGI.
        Imperial proposal, and advised, saying :-" Why should we
        reverence strange deities, and turn our backs upon the gods of
        our country? Of course we know naught of any such thing."
        The Oho-ami Saga no Mumako no Sukune said :-" Let us
        render assistance in compliance with the Imperial command.
        Who shall offer advice to the contrary?" Hereupon the
        Imperial Prince the Emperor's younger brother [the Imperial
        Prince Anahobe is meant. l He was the Emperor's younger
        brother, born of a concubine], introduced into the interior (of
        the Palace) a priest of the Land of Toyo 2 [the personal name
        is wanting]. Mononobe no Moriya no Ohonluraji glared at
        them in great wrath. Then Kekuso, Oshi..sakabe no Fubito,
        came hastily and spoke secretly to the Ohomuraji, saying : -
        " All the Ministers are now plotting against thee, and moreover
        are about to waylay thee." When the Ohomuraji heard this,
        he retired to Ato [Ato is the name of a place where the Oho-
        muraji had a country house] and assembled a body of men.
        Nakatomi no Katsumi no Muraji assembled troops at his house
        and went with them to the assistance of the Ohomuraji. At
        length he prepared figures of the Imperial Prince Hikobito, the
        Heir Apparent, and of the Imperial Prince Takeda, and loathed
        them. 3 But presently finding that success was impossible, he
        repaired to the Palace of the Imperial Prince Hikobito at
        Mimata. One of the attendants 4 (of the Prince) named Ichihi,
XXI. 6. Tomi no abita [Tomi is the family name, and Ichihi the
        personal name], watched till Katsumi no Muraji was withdraw-
        ing from the place where the Imperial Prince Hikobito was, and
        drawing his sword, slew him. The Ohomuraji from his house
        at Ato sent a message to Miimako no Oho-ami by Wosaka, Mono-
        nobe no Yasaka no Oho-ichi no Miyakko, and Ani, Urushibe- o

         I The" Shukai " editor thinks we should understand here the Emperois

       younger brother and the Imperial Prince.
         2 Or perhaps Toyokuni was his name.
          3 Le. practised ,vitchcraft on theln.

         .. Toneri.
         ;) This naUle may be read either Urushibe no Miyakko or Nuribe no
       Miyakko. Urushi is "varnish," and nuri Ineans "to sUlear," so that the
       difference is not very material. 'fhis is the first mention of lacquer in
       Japanese literature, and although it indicates that the art was already known"
       we may safely set aside as later inventions the statements referring it to a
       much earlier period which are quoted, with a reserve amply justified by the
                                    VOMEI.                                    I I I

no Miyakko, say"ing :-" Hearing that the Ministers have
designs against me, I am keeping out of the way." Miimako
no Oho-ami accordingl)' sent Hashi no Yajima no Muraji to the
place \vhere Ohotomo no Hirafu no Muraji was, and told him
all that the Ohomuraji had said. Hirafu no Muraji, therefore,
took in his hand his bo,v and arro,vs and his leathern shield
and went to the house at Tsukikuma [the Oho-ami's house],
\vhere he renlained guarding the Oho-ami, and did not leave
him b)' night or by day.
   The Emperor's sores became \vorse and \vorse, and \vhen
the end ,vas approaching, Tasuna of the Kuratsukuri 1 Be [son
of Shiba TattoJ came forward and addressed him, sa)?ing : -
"Th)? servant, on behalf of the Emperor, ,viII renounce the
\vorld and exercise religion. Moreover, he ,viII make an image
of Buddha sixteen feet high, and a Temple." The Emperor
was deeply· n10ved. This is the 16-foot ,vooden image of
Buddha ,,,,hich ,vith its attendant Bosatsu 2 no,v stands in the
Temple of Sakata at Minabuchi.
   9th da}·. The Emperor died in the Great Hall.
   Autun1n, 7th month, 21st day. He ,vas buried In the
Misasagi above the pond of Ihare. 3

facts, in an essay on Lacquer in the" Catalogue of Japanese Lacquer and
 Metal Work in the l~urlington :Fine Arts Club, 1894."
   The Urushibe (or Nuribe) no Muraji (a higher rank than l\Iiyakko) \vere
proll1oted to be Vrushibe no Sukune in 685.
   An ancient note to the " I~iuiiki," 111. 16, traces the descent of the l'rushibe
no Muraji {roln a deity.
   1 Saddle-lnakers.

   2 i.e. Boddhisattwa.     1"he t\\"o Bosatsu here alluded to are probably
Ji-z6 Bosatsu (I{shidi.garbha) and Monju Bosatsu, the Sanskrit l\lafid-
jus'r!. I/ide Eitel, sub '(Ioec. Also '('lile "Sato\v's Handbook," 2nd ed.
introduction, p. 87.
   3 After\\'ards re-interred at Shinaga in Kahachi.
            112                             NIHONGI.



                                 THE EMPEROR HATSUSEBE. 1


                                     (SU]UN2 TENNO-')

XX"!. 7.       The Emperor Hatsusebe was the twelfth child of the Emperor
            Ame-kuni Oshi-hiraki hiro-niha." 3 His mother's name was
            Wo-ane 4 no Kimi [daughter of Iname no Sukune, as already
            stated] .
              The Emperor Tachibana no Toyohi died in the second year
            of his reign, Summer, the 4th month. In the 5th month the
            army of the Mononobe no Ohomuraji made a disturbance
            thrice. The Ohomuraji from the first wished to set aside the
            other Imperial Princes and to establish the Imperial Prince
            Anahobe as Emperor. He now hoped to make use of a
            hunting party to devise a plan for raising him to the throne
            instead. So he secretly sent a messenger to the Imperial
            Prince Anahobe, to say :-" I should like to hunt with the
            Imperial Prince in Ahaji." The plot leaked out.
              6th month, 7th day. Soga no Mumako no Sukune and
           other Ministers, on behalf of Kashikiya hime no Mikoto,
           commissioned:' Nifute, Saheki no Muraji, Ihamura, Hashi no
            Muraji, and Makuhi, Ikuba no Omi, saying :-" Do ye with
           rigorous discipline of arms proceed at once to execute the
            Imperial Prince Anahobe and the Imperial Prince Yakabe."
           On this day, at midnight, Nifute, Saheki no Muraji, and his
           colleagues surrounded the Palace of the Imperial Prince
           Anahobe. Upon this the guardsmen, having first ~Iimbed up
           into the upper story, smote the Imperial Prince Anahobe on
           the shoulder. The Imperial Prince fell down from the upper
           story, and. ran away into an outhouse. Then the guardsmen,
           holding up lights, executed him.
              8th day. The Imperial Prince Yakabe was executed.
                   The Imperial Prince Yakabe was the son of the Emperor

             1  The" Kojiki " calls him Hatsusebe no Waka-sazaki.
            2 Venerable-lofty.                            KiInmei Tenno.
            4 i.e. little-eIder-sister.

            ,., The character used is jB, generally applied to an edict or order of the
           Emperor.
                                    SUJUK.                           113

      Hinokunla 1 and father of Princess I(amutsu hime. This
     is not clear.
   He was put to death because he approved the Imperial
Prince Anahobe.
   9th day. The nun Zen-shin and the others addressed the
Oho-omi, saying :-" Discipline is the basis of the method of XXI. 8.
those who renounce the \"orld; \ve pray thee to let us go to
Pekche to receive instruction in the Law of Discipline." This
month tribute Envo)?s from Pekche arrived at Court. The
Oho-omi addressed the Envoys, saying :-" Take these nuns
with you, and \vhen you are about to cross over to your
country, make them learn the Law of Discipline. When they
have done, send them off." The Envoys answered and said:-
"\\Then we return to onr frontier State, we shall first of all
inform the King of our country', and it "viII after\vards be not
too late to send them off." 2
   Autumn, 7th month. The Oho-ami, Saga no Mllmako no
Sukune, incited the Imperial Princes and the ~Iinisters to plot
the destruction of the Ohomuraji, Mononobe no Moriya. The
Imperial Prince Hatsusebe, the Imperial Prince Takeda, the
Imperial Prince Muma)·ado, the Imperial Prince Naniha, the
Imperial Prince Kasuga, the Oho.. omi, Saga no Mumako no
Sukune, Womaro no Sukune, I{i no Omi, Hirafu, Kose no Omi,
I{atafu, Kashihade no Omi, and \Vonara, Katsuraki no Omit
together led an army, and advanced to attack the Ohomuraji.
Kurafu, Ohotomo no Muraji, Hito, Abe no Omi, Ite, Heguri
no Omi, Nukade, Sakamoto no Omi, and Kasuga no Omi [the
personal name is not given', together led a force from the
district of Shiki 3 as far as the house of Shibukaha. 4 The
Ohomuraji, in personal comn1and of the young men of his
family and of a slave-army, built a rice-fort and gave battle.
Then the Ohomuraji climbed up into the fork of an elm a at
Kisuri, from which he shot do,vn arrows like rain. His troops XXI. 9.
were full of might. The)" filled the house and overflowed into
the plain. The arm~y of the Imperial Princes and the troops
of the Ministers were timid and afraid, and fell back three
times. At this time the Imperial Prince Nllimayado, his hair
 1 Senk\va Tenno.           ~ See helo,,", XXI. . 13.   3   In Kahachi.
 4 i.e. the Oholnuraji's house at Shibukaha.
 5 The yenoki or Celtis sinensis.
         114                              NIIIONGI.

          being tied up on the temples 1 [the ancient custom was for boy's
          of the age of fifteen or sixteen to tie up their hair on the
          temples; at the age of seventeen or eighteen it was divided,
         and made into tufts, as is the case even now], follo\ved in the
          rear of the arm)r. He pondered in his own mind, saying to
          himself :-" Are we not going to be beaten? Without prayer
         we cannot succeed." So he cut down a nuride tree,~ and
         swiftly fashioned images of the four Heavenly Kings. s Placing
         them on his top-knot, he uttered a vow :-" If we are now made
         to gain the victor)· over the enemy, I promise faithfully· to
         honour the four Heavenly Kings, guardians of the world, by·
         erecting to them a temple with a pagoda." The Oho-omi
         Saga no Miimako also uttered a vow :-" Oh! all ye Heavenly'
         Kings and great Spirit King, 4 aid and protect us, and make
         us to gain the advantage. If this prayer is granted, I will erect
         a temple ,vith a pagoda in honour of the Heavenly Kings and
         the great Spirit King, and will propagate everywhere the three
         precious things." 'Vhen they had made this VO\V, they urged,
         their troops of all arms sternly forward to the attack. N O\\P
         there was a man named Ichihi, Tomi no Obito, who shot down
XXI. 10. the Ohomuraji from his branch and killed him and his children.
         The Ohomuraji's troops accordingly gave way suddenly. Join-
         ing their forces, the}r everyone put on black clothes, and
         going hUl1ting on the plain of Magari in Hirose, so dispersed.o
         In this ,var some of the children and relatives of the Oho..
         muraji made their escape, and concealing. themselves on the
         plain of Ashihara., changed their personal names and altered
         their titles,6 \vhile others fled away nobody knew where.
           I The interli!lear version calls this style hisago-hana, i.e. gourd.flo\ver ;

        the lnanly style is called age-lnaki, or rolling up.
           2 It ii doubtful what kind of tree is intended.    Nuride is the interlinear
        gloss. The l1uride or nurude resembles the lacquer tree (nuri means lacquer).
        Hepburn calls it Rhus setnialata.
          a Shi-ten-o or Chatur Maharadjas. Four demon kings \vho guard the
        \vorld against Asuras. Vide Eitel, p. 174, 2nd edt ; also "Satow's Hand..
        book," p. 556.
          4 Daijinn6 or Mahakala.       Vide Eitel, pp. 85 and 91. Identified \vith the
        tnodem Daikoku Sarna. Vide" Anderson's B. M. Catalogue," p. 33.
           5 I t is explained here that " black" was the colour of underlings' clothes,

        and that the chiefs put on this colour for disguise. The" hunting" \\'as
        only a pretence.
          ti Or surnalues.
                                SVJVN.                               115

The people of that time said of them to one another :-" The
\vife of Saga no Oho-omi is the )younger sister of the Oho-
muraji ~lononobe no Mori~ya, and the Oho-omi, injudiciously
acting on his wife's advice, slew the Ohomuraji." 1
   \Vhen the civil troubles had been quieted, a Temple of the
Four Heavenly Kings 2 ,vas built in the province of Settsu.
Half of the Ohomuraji's slaves, together with his house, \vere
constituted the slaves and farm-house of the Great Temple, and
ten thousand shiro 3 of rice-land \vere given to Ichihi, Tomi
no Obito. Moreover, Saga no Oho-omi, in fulfilment of his XXI. 11.
VO\V, erected the Temple of H()k()ji 4 in Asuka.    A dependant
of the Ohomuraji ~fononobe no Mori)ya named Yorodzu,
 [the personal name], of the Tottori-be, in command of one
hundred men, guarded the house at Naniha, but hearing of
                                        i)


the Ohomuraji's do,vnfall, he urged his horse into a gallop,
and made his escape by night in the direction of the village of
 ~\rimaka in the district of Chinu, \vhere, having passed his
 \vife's house, he at length concealed himself among the hills.
 The Court took counsel together, saying :-" Yorodzu cherishes
 traitorous feelings, and therefore has concealed himself among
 these hills. Let his kindred be extirpated promptly, and no
 remissness sho\\"n." Yorodzu, in tattered and filthy raiment,
 and with a wretched countenance, came forth alone, of his
 own accord, bow in hand and girt with a sword. The officials
 sent several hundred guardsmen to surround him. Yorodzu,
 accordingly, was afraid, and hid himself in a bamboo thicket,
 where he tied cords to the bamboos and pulled them so as to
 shake the bamboos, and thus make the people to doubt \vhere
 he had gone iR. The guardsmen were deceived, and pointing
 to the quivering bamboos, ran forward, saying :-" Yorodzu is
  here!" Yorodzu forthwith shot his arro\vs, not one of which
  missed its mark, so that the guardsmen \vere afraid, and did
  not dare to approach. Yorodzu then unstrung his bow, and

  1  She \vished to appropriate to herself his property.
  ~ At   Osaka. Still known as fennoji. l/ide" Murray's Handbook of
Japan," 3rd ed. p. 285.
  :£ The tj (shiro) is equal100"        or nlOW~ a measure which, according
to present Chinese reckoning, is equal to 15. I 3 acres. Vide Giles.
   4 Near Nara.    It is no long-er in existence.
   a Of the Ohonluraji.
        116                            NIHONGI.

        takin~ it under his arm, ran off towards the hills.   The guards-
         men accordingly pursued him, shooting their arrows at him
         from both sides of a river, but none of them were able to hit
XXI. 12. him. Hereupon one of the guardsmen ran on swiftly, and
         got before Yorodzu. Lying down by the river's side, he aimed
         at hIm, and hit him on the knee. Yorodzu forthwith pulled
         out the arrow, and stringing his bow, let fly his arrows. Then
         prostrating himself on the earth, he exclaimed aloud :-" A
         shield of the Emperor, Yorodzu would have devoted his valour
         to his service, but no examination was made, and, on the
         contrary, he has been hard pressed, and is now at an ex-
         tremity. Let some one come forward and speak with me, for
         it is my desire to learn whether I am to be slain or to be made
         a prisoner." The guardsmen raced up and shot at Yorodzu,
         but he warded off the flying shafts, and slew more than thirty
         men. Then he took the sword which he wore, and cut his
         bow into three pieces, and bending back his sword, flung it into
         the midst of the water of the river. With a dagger which he
         had besides, he stabbed himself in the throat, and died. The
         Governor of Kahachi reported the circumstances of Yorodzu's
         death to the Court, which gave an order by a stamp 1 that his
         body should be cut into eight pieces and disposed for exposure
         among the eight provinces. The Governor 2 of Kahachi
         accordingly, in obedience to the purport of the stamped order,
         was about to dismember him for exposure, when thunder
         pealed, and a great rain fell. Now, there was a white dog
         \\~hich had been kept by Yorodzu.     Looking up, and looking
         down, he went round, howling beside the corpse, and at last,
         taking up the head in his mouth, placed it on an ancient
         mound. He then lay down close by, and starved to death in
         front of it. The Governor of Kahachi, thinking that dog's
         conduct very strange, reported it to the Court. The Court
         could not bear to hear of it for pity, and issued a stamped
         order to this effect :-" The case of this dog is one that is
         rarely heard of in the world, and should be shown to after
         ages. Let Yorodzu's kindred be made to constr.llct a tomb
         and bury their remains." The kindred of Yorodzu accord-
          1 Oshide.   A stamp ot red or black ink on the palrn of the hand as token
        of authority.
          2 II   Rf. The Interlinear Kana is mikoto-mochi.
                                 SUJUN.                                117

ingly' assembled together, and raised a tomb in the villagoe of
Arimaka, \vhere they buried Yorodzu and his dog.
   I t ,vas reported from the province of Kahachi that on the
plain 1 of the Ri,·er of Yega there ,vere slain men to the number
it might be of several hundreds. Their corpses had become
putrefied, so that their nanles could not be ascertained, but by XXI. 13·
the colour of the clothing their bodies ,,,ere taken up (by' their
friends) for burial. No,v there ,vas a dog, kept by Inu, Saku-
rawi no Tanabe no l\tluraji, who held on by his teeth to the dead
body (of his master), and l.ying beside it, guarded it closel)F, not
getting up to go away until he had caused it to be taken up for
burial.
   8th month, 2nd day. The Emperor, upon the advice of
Kashiki:ya hime no Mikoto and the ~Iinisters, assumed the
Imperial Dignit)F. Soga no Mumako no Sukune ,vas made
Oho-omi as before. The Ministers and Daibu ,vere also con-
firmed in their previous ranks.
   In this month the Palace ,vas made at Kurahashi. 2
   1st year, Spring, 3rd month. \Voteko, daughter of Oho- A.D. 588.
tomo no Nukade no Muraji, was appointed Consort. She bore
the Imperial Prince Hachiko and the Imperial Princess Nishi-
kide.
   This )"ear, the Land of Pekche sent Envoys~ and along with
them the Buddhist priests Hye-song, Nybng-Keun, and Rye-
sik/ vvrith a present of Buddhist relics. The Land of Pekche
sent the Eun-sol, Syu-sin, the Tok-sol, Ke-ffiun, and the Na-
sal, Pok-pu-me-sin, with tribute, and also with a present of
Buddhist relics, the Buddhist priest N yong-ch)'o, the ascetics
Nyong-\vi, H:ye-chyung, Hye-syuk and To-om, the Temple
carpenters Ta-nyang Mi-ta and Mun-ko-ko-cha, a man learned
in the art of making braziers and chargers,4 the Chyan~-tok
 Peng--me-s:yun, men learned in potter)' named Mana Puna,
 Yang K\\ri-mun, Neung K\vi-mun and Syok-ma Tye-Ini, and a
 painter;' named pek-ka.

  I The dry bed of a river is frequently so called in Japan. They were often
used as execution Rrounds.
  2 In Yamato.           :1 In Japanese Ye-so, Ryo-kin, and Ye-shoku.
  4 Metal-founders.  These artizans had a defined rank and are called
Hakase, or doctor.
  S Probably of Buddhist pictures, says the" Shukai " editor.
         [ 18                           NIHONGI.

             Saga no ~1 umako no Sukune inquired of the Pekche priests
          the method of receiving discipline, and handing over to the
          Enn-sol, Syu-sin, and the other Pekche Envoys the nuns Zen-
          shin and her companions, despatched them (to Corea) for
          study. Having pulled down the house of Konoha, ancestor of
          the Asuka no Kinunuhi no Mi:yakko, he began to build the
          Temple of Hokoji. The name of this place was Asuka no
XXI. )4. Magami no Hara. It was also called Asuka no Tomada.
             This year was the year Tsuchinoye Saru (45th) of the C~ycle.
A.D. 589.   2nd year, Autumn, 7th month, 1st day. Kamafu, Afumi no
          Omi, was sent to the Tosando 1 to inspect the frontier of the
          territory of the Yemishi, Kari, Shishibito no Omi, to the
          Tokaido 2 to inspect the frontier of the provinces bordering on
          the Eastern ocean, and Abe no Omi to the Hokurikudo to
          inspect the frontier of the province of Koshi, etc. 3
A.D. 590.    3rd year, Spring, 3rd month. The student nuns, Zen-shin
          and her companions, returned from Pekche, and took up their
          abode in the Temple at Sakurawi.
             Autumn, loth month. People went to the hills to get timber
          for building Buddhist temples. In this year there entered
          religion as nuns, Zentoku, daughter of Ohotomo no Sadehiko no
          Muraji, and his Koma wives Shiraki hime and Kudara hime,!
          under the names of Zem-myo and ~/Iyo-kw(). Moreover men of
           Han i named Zen-so, Zen-tsu, H6 Jo-sho, Zen Chi-56, Zen
          Chi-kei, and Zen-kwo, with Tasuna, a son of Kuratsukuri be
          no Shiba Tatto, at the same time renounced the world, the latter
          taking the name of Tokusai Hoshi. 6
A.D. 591.   4th year, Spring, 4th month, 12th day. The Emperor
          Wosada. was buried in the Misasagi of Shinaga.7 This is the
          Mi~asagi where the Empress-consort, his mother, \\l'as buried.

           1 i.e. East-nl0untain-circuit, including the inland provinces east\vards

        frool Afunli (umi). The Interlinear Kana has Adzullla, which is not quite
        the same.
           2 East-sea-circuit, including the provinces along the East Coast {roln Iga
        to Hitachi.
           , Viz. Etchiu, Echizen, and Echigo.
          .. i.e. the Silla lady and the Pekche lady.
          i China.     No doubt we should understand the Ayabito family of Chinese
        descent. The names are Chinese, but as the persons who bore them had
        probably never been in China, I have not gi\·en the Chinese pronunciation.
          6 Hoshi is a priestly title.                    7 In Kahachi.
                                    SUJUN.                                    119

    AutUl11n, 8th month, 1st day.   The Emperor addressed his XXI 15.
 Ministers, saying :-" It is our desire to establish I mna. What
do ye think?" The Ministers said to him :_f' The 1\fiyake
of Imna should be established. We are all of the same opinion
as Your ~Iajesty."
    \Vinter, 11th nl0nth, 4th day. I(i no \Vomaro no Sukune,
 Hirafu, Kose no Omi, Kashihade no Omi, Ohotomo 110 Kuhi
no ~Iuraji, and Katsuraki no Wonara no Omi ,vere appointed
as Generals. Taking with them the Omi and M uraji of the
various Houses as Adjutant-Generals of the divisions of the
army, they marched out in command of over 20,000 men and
stationed themselves in Tsukushi. Kishi no !{ana \vas sent to
Silla and Kishi 1 no Itahiko to Jmna to make inquiry respecting
Imna.
   5th year, \Vinter, loth month, 4th day. A \vild boar was A.D. 592.
presented to the Emperor. Pointing to it, he said :-" When
shall those to whom We have an aversion be cut off as this
wild boar's throat has been cut?" An abundance of ,veapons
was provided beyond what was customary.
    loth day. Saga no Miimako no Sukune, having been told
of the pronouncement of the Emperor, and alarmed at his
detestation of himself, called together his people and conspired
\vith them to assassinate the Emperor.
   In this month, the Hall of Worship and the covered gallery
of the great H6koji Temple were built.
   11th Illonth, 3rd day. Miimako no Sukune lied to the
Ministers, saying :-" To-day I present the taxes of the Eastern
provinces," and sent Kama, Yamato no Aya no Atahe, ,vho
killed the Emperor.
         One book says :-" Kama, Yamato no Aya no Atahe,
      was the son of Ihawi, Yamato no Aya no Atahe."
   On this day the Emperor was buried in the Misasagi on the
hill of Kurahashi.
         One book says :-The Imperial concubine Ohotomo no XXI. 16-
      Koteko, incensed at her declining favour, sent a man to
      Soga no Mumako no Sukune with a message, saying:-
      "Recently a wild boar was presented to the Emperor.
      I'e pointed to it and said :-' When shall the man We

  I   It seems doubtful ,vhether Kishi is here part of the name or a title.
 120                         NIHONGI.

      think of be cut off as this wild boar's throat has been cut? '
      Besides weapons are being made in abundance in the
      Palace." Now ~1umako no Sukune, hearing this, was
      alarmed.
    5th da:y. Mounted messengers \vere sent to the General's
 quarters in Tsukushi, saying :-" Do not let foreign matters be
 neglected in consequence of the internal troubles."
   This month, !(oma, Yamato Aya no Atahe, had a clandestine
amour witll the Ilnperiul concubine Kahakami no Iratsume,
daughter of Saga, and 111ade her his \"ife. [Kahakami no
Iratsume was the daughter of Soga no Miimako no Sukune.]
Miimakd no Sukune did not find out immediately that Kaha-
kami no Iratslllne had been clandestinely possessed by Koma,
and supposed that she was dead. But when Kama's intrigue
,vith the Imperial concubine became kno\vn he was killed by
the Oho-omi.
                            BOOK XXII. l

           THE EMPRESS TOYO.. ~1IKE KASHIKI-YA-HI~1E.2



                         (SUIKO        TENNO.)

THE Empress Toy'o-mike Kashiki-ya-hime ,,"as the second"
daughter of the Emperor Ame.. kuni oshi-hiraki hiro-niha:) and
a )Tounger sister by' the same mother of the Emperor Tachi-
bana no toyo-hi. 6 In her childhood she ,\?as called the Princess
Nukada-be. Her appearance ,vas beautiful, and her conduct
was marked by propriety'. At the age of eighteen, she ,vas
appointed Empress-consort of the Emperor Nunakura futo-
dama-shiki. 1 'Vhen she ,,,as thirty-four years of age, the
Emperor N unakura futo-dama-shiki died. "Then she was
thirty-nine years of age, in the 5th )'ear and the 11th nl0nth of
the reign of the Emperor Hatsuse-be,8 the Emperor "ras
murdered by the Oho-olni l\!Iumako no Sukune, and the suc-
cession to the Dignity' being vacant, the Ministers besought
the Empress-consort of the Emperor N unakura futo-dama-
shiki, viz. the Princess N ukarla-be, to ascend the throne. The
Empress refused, but the public functionaries urged her in
memorials three times until she consented, and the:y accordingly
delivered to her the Imperial Seal.
   \Vinter, 12th month, 8th da)T. The Empress-consort assumed
the Imperial Dignit)T in the Palace of Toyora. 9
   1st year, Spring, 1st month, 15th day. Relics of Buddha A.D. 593·

   1 From this point to the end of the \vork I have had the great advantage

of consulting Dr. Florenz's German translation.
  , Toyo, abundant; 1I/i, august; i"e, food; K ashikiya, cook-house; hinle,
princess.
  3 Suika means" to reason froln antiquity."
  .. Literally middle.        ;) Kimmei.          6 YOlnei.       ; Bidatsu.
  ~ Sujun.                    9 In Yalnato.
        122                               NIHONGI.

         were deposited in the foundation-stone of the pillar of the
         pagoda 1 of the Temple of H6koji.
            16th day. The Pagoda-pillar was erected.
            Summer, 4th month, loth day. The Imperial Prince Miin1a-
XXII. 2. yado no Toyotomimi was appointed Prince Imperial. He had
         general control of the Government, and ,vas entrusted with all
         the details of administration. He was the second child of the
         Emperor TachibaIla no Toyo-hi. The El11press-consort his
         mother's name was the Imperial Princess Anahobe no Hashi-
         bito. The Empress-consort, on the day of the dissolution of
         her pregnancy, went round the forbidden precinct, inspectin~
         the different offices. When she came to the Horse Department,
         and had just reached the door of the stables. 2 she was suddenly
         delivered of him without effort. He was able to speak as soon
         as he was born, and was so ,vise when he grew up that he
         could attend to the suits of ten men at once and decide them
         all without error. He knew beforehand what \vas going to
         happen. Moreover he learnt the Inner Doctrine 3 from a !{oryo
         Priest named Hye-cha, and studied the Outer Classics -I with a
         doctor called Hak-ka. 5 In both of these branches of study he
         became thoroughly proficient. The Emperor his father loved
         him, and made him occupy the Upper Hall South of the

           1 The Chinese character here translated" pagoda~' is ~Ij, pronounced

        setsu in Japanese. This \vords lneans (with the pronunciation chol) in Corean
        Buddhist tenlples generally, and it is the saBle \vord \vhich we have in the
        Japanese tera, tenlple. But in the present passage it would seenl that one of
        the subsidiary buildings of a Buddhist telnple is intended, no doubt sonle-
        thing in the form of a pagoda, corresponding to either 6 or 14 in the dra\ving
        in "Murray's Handbook of Japan" (Introduction, p. 26). A pagoda in Japan
        is built round a solid central pillar (referred to in the text) which runs up to the
        topmost story. Shari, relics, is the Japanese fornl of the Sanskrit sarira, body.
        The shari at Ikegan1i near Tokio is said to be part of the shoulder-blade of
        Saint Nichiren.
           The Pagoda is the Chinese and Japanese counterpart of the Indian stupa
        and an essentially sepulchral 111onun1ent. The stories, of \vhich there is
        ahvays an odd nun1ber, represent ul1lbrellas of honour. Vide an instructive
        article by Miss Gordon Cun11ning in the" English Illustrated Magazine."
           2 Hence his nallle, :\Iihna-ya-do, \vhich nleans stable door.
           3 i.e. BuddhislU.

           4 i.e. the Chinese Classics.   Inner and Outer have here s0111ething- of the
        force of our ,vords sacred and secular.
           5 The Corean pronunciation.
                                  SUIKO.                                 J26

Palace. l'herefore he ,vas styled the Senior Prince Kamu-tsu-
miya/ ~luma.ya-do To)?otomimi.
   Autumn, 9th month. The renlains of the Emperor Tachi-
bana no Toyohi were remoyed and re-interred in the Misasagi of
Shinaga in Kahachi.
   In this :year the building of the Ten1ple of Shi-ten-o-ji ~ at
Arahaka in Naniha \vas begun.
   This year \\?as the year Midzunoto C shi (50th) of the
Cycle.
   2nd year, Spring, 2nd month, 1St day. The Empress in- A.D. 594.
structed the Prince Imperial and the Oho-on1i to promote the
prosperity of the Three Precious Things. At this time, all the
Omi and Muraji vied each \vith one another in erecting Buddhist
shrines for the benefit of their Lords and parents. These were
called Temples."
   3rd year, Summer, 4th month. Lign-aloes a \vood drifted A.D. 595.
                                                                  XXII. 3.
ashore on the Island of ~\haji. It ,vas a fathom round. The
people of the island, being unacquainted \vith aloes ,,,ood, used
it \vith other fire,\rood to burn in their cooking range, when
the smoky vapour spread a perfume far and wide. \Vondering
at this, they presented it to the Empress.
   5th month, loth day. A priest of Koryn, named Hye-cha,
emigrated to Japan, and \vas taken as teacher by the Prince
Imperial. In the same year a Pekche priest, named Hye-
chhong, arrived. These t,vo priests preached the Buddhist
religion \videly, and \vere together the mainstay of the Three
Precious Things.
   Autumn, 7th month. The General and his follo,vers arrived
from Tsukushi.
  1   Kan1u-tsU-Jlliya llleans upper palace.
  2   Shi-ten-o-ji l11eans the Telnple of the Four (l)cya) Kings. This Telnple
is still in existence-not the original building, ho\\'cyer. Arahaka is the
name of the place \vhere it stands. It n1eans ruined tOlnb.
   :s See above, p. 104.
    4 'fhe Chinese character used here is .;ij:, but whether the author refers

to the use of this character (\\·ith the sound J·i) at the end of nanles of
13uddhist tetnples, or \vhether he ,vas thinking of the Japanese \yord tera,
telllple, is not very clear. Tera, though ahvays \vritten .;ij:, is really, as
already pointed out, derived frolll the Chinese ~Ij through the Corean
chol.
   ~) Aquilaria agallochuln.
               12 4                           NIHONGI.

A. H.   596.   4th year, \Vinter, 11th month. The building of the Temple
            of H6koji ,vas finished. Accordingl:y Zentoku no Omi, son of
            the Oho-omi, was appointed Commissioner for the Temple.
            On this da)T the two priests Hye-cha and Hye-chhong took up
            their residence in Hokoji.
A.D. 597·      5th year, Summer, 4th month, 1st day. The Kin~ of Pekche
            sent Prince A-cha with tribute.
               \Vinter, 11th month, 22nd da~y. Ihagane no Kishi \vas sent
            to Silla.
.-\.D. 598•    6th year, Summer, 4th month. Ihagane Naniha no Kishi
            arrived from Silla, and presented to the Empress a pair of
XXII. 4. magpies. They were accordingly made to be kept in the wood
            of N aniha, where they built their nest on the branch of a tree,
            and had their )'~oung.l
               Autumn, 8th month, 1st day'. Silla sent tribute of a peacock.
               \Vinter, loth month, loth da)r. The Land of Koshi pre-
            sented a \vhite deer to the Enlpress.
A.D. 599·      7th year, Summer, 4th month, 27 th day'. There was an
            earthquake which destroyed all the houses. So orders were
            given to all quarters to sacrifice to the God ~ of Earthquakes.
XXII. 5·       Autumn, 9th month, 1st day. Pekche sent tribute of one
            camel, two sheep, and one white pheasant.3
A.)). 600.     8th ~year, Spring, 2nd month. Silla and Imna made war
            against each other. The Empress wished to assist Imna,4 and
            in this year appointed Sakahibe no Omi General-in-Chief, and
            Hodzumi no Omi Assistant General, in command of over
            10,000 men to invade Silla on behalf of Imna.      Hereupon they
            went straight to Silla, and on arriving there by sea, laid siege
            to five fortresses and captured them. Now the King of Silla
            was struck \vith fear, and raising a white flag, came to the
            General's standard and offered his submission, ceding the six
            fortified places of Tatara, Sonara, Pulchik\vi, Witha, South
                 1 Magpies are very plentiful in Corea.   In Japan they are a some,vhat
               rare bird. I have seen theln near Kurume in the province of Higo.
                 ::1 Fronl a notice in the" Shoku-Nihongi " it appears that in the reign of

               Shomu (724-748) there were shrines to this God in all the seven home
               provinces.
                 3 See below, XX". 46.
                 4 Irona was incorporated with Silla A.D. 532, and is not mentioned in the

               " Tongkam " after that date. The" Nihongi " narrative ll1ay have reference
               to some rebellion of the lrona people.
                                  SUIKO.                                J26

Kara, and Ara. 1 Then the Generals took counsel together,
saying :-" Silla, conscious of guilt, makes his submission; it
""QuId be \vrong to insist on chastising him." Accordingly they
reported to the Empress. Hereupon the Empress further sent
~Iiwa, ~aniha no Kishi, to Silla, and also Itahiko, Naniha no
Kishi, to I mna. 130th \vere to examine the state of affairs.
Hereupon the Kings of the t\VO countries of Silla and Imna
sent Envoys \vith tribute, and delivered a memorial to the
Empress, saying :-" In Heaven above there are Gods; on
Earth there are Emperors. Besides these two classes of Gods,
,vhat else is there \vhich \ve should fear? Henceforward \ve
,vill refrain from making war on one another, and will every
year attend the Court without fail, not allowing the helms of
our ships to become dry." Accordingly the Empress sent X:\ 1I. 6.
messengers to recall the Generals, but no sooner had they
arrived from Silla than Silla again invaded Inlna.
   9th year, Spring, 2nd month. The building of a Palace in A.D. 601.
Ikaruga 2 ,vas begun b~y the Prince Imperial.
   3rd month, 5th da~y. Kurafu/l Ohotomo no Nfuraji, was sent
on a mission to Koryc), and N ukade, Sakamoto no Omi, to
Pekche, ordering them to proceed instantly to the assistance
of Imna.
   Summer, sth month. The Empress dwelt in the temporary
Palace of Miminashi. ..\t this time there were heavy rains, and
the river overflowed its banks, filling the Court of the Palace.
   Autumn, 9th month, 8th day. A spy from Silla named
Kamata came to Tsushima. He was forthwith arrested, and
delivered up 4 to the Government, who banished hin1 to
 Kamitsukenu. 3
   Winter, 11th month, 5th day. The question of making war
on Silla was considered.
   10th year, Spring, 2nd 1110nth, 1st day. The Imperial A.D. 602.
Prince Kume 6 was appointed General for the invasion of Silla,
and was granted the various Be of the service of the GOdS,i

  1 These places are in IJnna.
  2 Near where the Telnple of H6riuji now stands.               3 Or Kuhi.

  4 Literally sent as tribute.                                 ;) Kodzuke.
  6 If Kume is ~, ,var, as is probable, there is an obvious propriety in this
appointment.
  1 Such as the Nakatonli, the hnbe, etc.
 VOL.    II.                                                      K
         126                                 NIHOKGI.

           together ,vith the Kuni no J\Iiyakko and the Torno no Miyakko~
           and an arnlY of 25,000 men.
              Summer, 4th month, 1St da)y. General the Imperial Prince
           Kume arrived in Tsukushi, and proceeded to the district of
           Shima, ,vhere he encamped, and assembled ships for the
          transport of proyisions for his arm~y.
XXII. j.     6th month, 3rd da)y. Kurafu, Ohotomo no Muraji, and
           Nukade, Sakamoto no ami, arrived together from pekche. At
          this time the Imperial Prince I~un1e fell ill, and ,vas unable to
          carry out the expedition.
             'Vinter, loth month. A Pekche priest nanled K\val..leuk
          arrived and presented by ,va)W of tribute books of Calendar-
          making, of Astronom)Y, and of Geography,t and also books of the
          art of invisibility and of magic. At this time three or four pupils
          \vere selected, and made to study under K,val-Ieuk. Ochin, ~ the
          ancestor of the Yako no Fumibito, studied the art of Calendar-
          making. Kos(-,':; Otomo no Suguri, studied Astronomy and the art
          of invisibility. Hinamitatsu, Yamashiro no Omi, studied magic.
          They all studied so far as to perfect themselves in these arts.
             Illtercalary' loth month, 15th day. Two Buddhist priests
          of Koryo named Seung-nyung and U n-chhong emigrated here
          together.
A.D. 603.    11th year, Spring, 2nd month, 4th day. The Imperial
          Prince Kume died in Tsukushi. A mounted courier \vas
          despatched to report the ne\vs to the Empress. N O\V when the
          Empress heard it, she ,vas greatly' shocked, and straight,va)·
          sending for the Prince Imperial and Soga no Oho-ami, spoke
          to them, saying :-" The Imperial Prince KUlne, the General-
XXII. 8. in-Chief for the chastisement of Silla, has died. On the point
          of undertaking a great project, he has failed to accomplish it.
          Is not this much to be lamented? " So he \vas temporarily
          interred at Saba in the Prayince of Su,vo, and Wite, Hashi no
          Mnraji" ,vas sent to superintend the temporary burial. There-

          1   The term used \\'ould include Geolnancy.
          ~ Ochin is a nal11e of Chinese or Corean origin, but as it is borne by a
        Japanese, I ghoe it the Japanese pronunciation. Fumibito or fl1bito Ineans
        scribes.
           :J Or Takatoshi.

           4 See '''01. I. p. lSI.   It \,"ould appear frOlll this that Hashi no l\'luraji \vas
        still an office \vith specific duties, and not a lllere title.
                                  SCIKO.                                12j

fore the descendants of'Vite no Muraji were called Saba no
Muraji. This \vas the reason of it.
   He (the Prince) ,,"as after"rards buried on the top of ~[ount
Hanifu in Kahachi.
   Summer, 4th month, 1st day'. A ne\v appointment was
made of the Imperial Prince Tahema,l the elder brother of
the Imperial Prince Kume, as General for the chastisement of
Silla.
  Autumn, 7th month, 3rd da)". The Imperial Prince Tahema
sailed from Naniha.
   6th day. The Imperial Prince Tahema arrived at Harima.
No\v his \vife, Princess Toneri, who accompanied him, died at
Akashi, and \\·as buried on the top of the Hill of Higasa. So
Prince Tahema returned, and never accomplished his expedition
of chastisement.
   Winter, loth month, 4th da)T. There was a removal (of the
Imperial residence) to the Palace of'Voharida.
   11th month, 1st daj". The Prince Imperial addressed all the
high functionaries,~ sa)ring :-" I have an image of the venerable
Buddha. \Vhich of y'ou will receive this image and worship it
reverently? "     No,," Kahakatsu, Hada no Miyakko, came
for,vard and said :-" Thy servant ,viiI worship it." So he
received the image of Buddha, and built for it the Temple of
Hachi-woka.:\
   In this month, the Prince Imperial having asked permission
of the Empress, made great shields and quivers. Moreover he
painted banners:'                                                 xx II. ~.
   12th month, 5th day'. Cap-ranks & were first instituted,
VIZ. : -


  1   Or Taillla.                            ~ Daibu.
  ~ The    present Teluple of K\vo-riu-ji in Yaluashiro, district of I(adono.
"rhe Temple tradition says that this in1age ,vas of Miroku, i.e. Maitreya,
Buddha, the ll1erciful one, expected to appear and open a new era about
3000 years hence. Miroku is probably identical \\"ith the Corean 1niryoi',
the general term in that country for Buddhist inlages.
   4 As offerings to temples.   The banners were for display at Court cere·
Illonies. Seeapuper on the" Hi no Maru,"" T.A.S.].," \,701. XXII. 1893,£or
some account of these banners. See also Dr. Florenz's note on this passage.
   ;; The Chinese custoln of distinguishing rank by the fonn and materials of
the official cap. In luodern times a button on the top of the cap serves this
purpose.
          128                               N IIIONGI.
                        Dai-toku 1                (greater virtue),
                        Shej-toku                 (lesser virtue),
                        Dai-nin                   (greater benevolence),
                        Sho-nin                   (lesser benevolence),
                       Dai-rai                    (greater propriet:y),
                       Sh6-rai                    (lesser propriety),
                       Dai-shin                   (greater faith),
                       Sho-shin                   (lesser fai th),
                       Dai-gi .                    (greater justice),
                       Sho-gi.                    (lesser justice),
                       Dai-chi                    (greater kno\vledge),
                       Sho-chi                     (lesser kno\v ledge),
          -in all twelve grades. 2
             Each was made of sarcenet of a. special colour. 3 They \vere
          gathered up on the crown in the shape of a bag, and had a
          border attached. Only on the first da~y of the )rear were hair-
          flowers" worn.
 A.D. 604    12th year, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. Cap-ranks were for
XXII. 10.
          the first time granted to the various Ministers, there being a
          distinction for each.
             Summer, 4th month, 3rd day. The Prince Imperial in person
          prepared for the first time la,vs.:J There \vere seventeen clauses,
          as follows : -

            1 Or Daitoko.

            : The last fi\'e are the nalnes of the Chinese five cardinal virtues. Vide
         "Mayers' Manual," p. 3 11. The "Shiki;' infonns us that these ranks
         corresponded, the first t,vo to the fourth rank of that day, the next t\VO to the
         fifth and so on, there being nothing, ho\vever, to correspond to the last t\VQ
         (Daichi and Sh6chi) aboyc nlentioned. It is noticeable that the hig-hest
         ranks, \vhich cOlllprised but a slnall nunlber of persons, are not included in
          this table.
            These cap-ranks did not relnain long in use. They \vere subsequently
         1110dified, and ultilnately abandoned altogether.
            3 In inlitation of the contelnporary Sui dynasty of China, purple was for

         officials of the fifth rank and up\vards. Atr:Jl \vas green, rat" red, shin yello\v,
         .~. \vhite, and chi black. Princes and chief Ministers ,vore the cap of the
         highest rank, viz. toku.
            4 Hair ornaments of gold or silver in the shape of flo\yers.     Specimens are
         preserved in the Nara Museum. They are called Uzu in Japanese.
            ~ These so-called la\vs are cyidently rather of the nature of Illotal Inaxilns.
          Dr. Florenz has a highly instructive note on this passage, to \vhich I \vould
          refer the reader.
                                   SUJKO.                               12 9

   I. Harmony is to be valued,l and an avoidance of wanton
OpposItIon to be honoured. All men are influenced by
class-feelings, and there are fe\v who are intelligent. Hence
there are some \vho disobey their lords and fathers, or who
maintain feuds \vith the neighbouring villages. But when
those above are harmonious and those belo\v are friendly, and
there is concord in the discussion of business, right views of
things spontaneously gain acceptance. Then what is there
\vhich cannot be accomplished!
   II. Sincerely reverence the three treasures.       The three
treasures, viz. Buddha, the Law and the Priesthood, are the
final refuge of the four gener~ted beings,2 and are the supreme
objects of faith in all countries. What man in \vhat age can
fail to reverence this law? Few men are utterl)' bad. They
may be taught to follow it. But if they do not betake them to
the three treasures, wherewithal shall their crookedness be made
straight?
   III. \Vhen you receive the Imperial commands, fail Rot
scrupulously to obey them. The lord is Heaven, the vassal is
 Earth. Heaven overspreads, and Earth upbears. \Vhen this is
so, the four seasons follo\v their due course, and the po\vers of
 Nature obtain their efficacy. If the Earth attempted to
overspread, Heaven would simply fall in ruin. Therefore is it
that when the lord speaks, the vassal listens; \vhen the
superior acts, the inferior yields compliance. Consequently
\vhen you receive the Imperial commands, fail not to carry
them out scrupulously. Let there be a ,vant of care in this
 matter, and ruin is the natural consequence.
    IV. The Ministers and functionaries should make decorous
 behaviour their leading principle, for the leading principle of XXII. II.
 the government of the people consists in decorous behaviour.:i
 If the superiors do not behave \vith decorum, the inferiors are
 disorderly: if inferiors are wanting in proper behaviour, there

  1   r"'rom the "Lunyu," or " Analects" of Confucius.
  ~ That is, the beings produced in transmigration by the four processes of
being born from eggs, from a w0111b, 111oisture-bred, or formed by Ineta-
morphosis (as butterflies from caterpillars). SODle editions olnit the phrase
Buddha, the La\v and the Priesthood.
  3 The Chinese ii, Ii, decorum, courtesy, proper behaviour, ceremony,

gentlen1anly conduct as we should say.
         13°                             NIHONGI.

          must necessarily be offences. Therefore it is that when lord
         and vassal behave with propriety, the distinctions of rank are
          not confused: when the people behave with propriety, the
          Government of the Common\vealth proceeds of itself.
              V.. Ceasing from gluttony and abandoning covetous desires,
          deal impartially with the suits which are submitted to you. Of
          complaints brought b)T the people there are a thousand in one
          day. If in one day there are so many, how many will there be
          in a series of years? If the man who is to decide suits at law
          makes gain his ordinary motive, and hears causes with a view
          to receiving bribes, then will the suits of the rich man be like a
          stone flung into water, 1 while the plaints of the poor will
          resemble water cast upon a stone. Under these CirCUlTIstances
          the poor man will not know whither to betake himself. Here
          too there is a deficiency in the duty of the Minister.
              VI. Chastise that which is evil and encourage that which is
          good. This was the excellent rule of antiquity. Conceal not,
          therefore, the good qualities of others, and fail not to correct
          that which is wrong when you see it. Flatterers and deceivers
           are a sharp weapon for the overthrow of the State, and a
           pointed sword for the destruction of the people. Sycophants
           are also fond, when they meet, of dilating- to their superiors on
           the errors of their inferiors; to their inferiors, they censure the
           faults of their superiors. Men of this kind are all wanting in
           fidelity to their lord, and in benevolence towards the people.
           From such an origin great civil disturbances arise.
              VII. Let every man have his o,vn charge, and let not the
           spheres of duty be confused. When wise men are entrusted
           with office, the sound of praise arises. If unprincipled men
XXII. 12. hold office, disasters and tumults are multiplied. In this world,
           fe,v are born with knowledge: wisdom is the product of earnest
           meditation. In all things, whether great or small, find the
           right man, and they will surely be well managed: on allocca-
            sions, be the~y urgent or the reverse, meet but with a wise man,
           and they will of themselves be amenable. In this ,yay will the
            State be lasting and the Temples of the Earth and of Grain
           will be free from danger. Therefore did the wise sovereigns of
           antiquity seek the man to fill the office, and not the office for
            the sake of the man.
                            1   i.e. they tneet with no resistance.
                                   SUII(O.                                 13 I
   \'111. Let the ~Jinisters and functionaries attend the Court
early in the morning, and retire late. The business of the
State does not admit of remissness, and the ,,,hole day is hardly
enough for its accomplishment. If, therefore, the attendance
at Court is late, emergencies cannot be met: if officials retire
soon, the ,,"ork cannot be completed.
   IX. Good faith is the foundation of right. In everything let
there be good faith, for in it there surely consists the good and
the IJad, success and failure. If the lord and the vassal
observe good faith one ,vith another, what is there ,vhich
cannot l)e accomplished? If the lord and the vassal do not
observe good faith to\,'ards one another, everything \vithout
exception ends in failure.
   x. Let us cease from wrath, and refrain from angr)' looks.
N or let us be resentful when others differ from us. For all
men have hearts, and each heart has its o,vn leanings. Their
right is our \vrong, and our right is their ,vrong. \Ve are not
unquestionably sages, nor are the)t unquestionably fools. Both
of us are simply ordinary men. How can anyone lay dov{n a
rule by which to distinguish right from wrong? For \ve are
all, one ,Yith another, \vise and foolish, like a ring which has no XXIf. 13-
end. Therefore, although others give wa)' to anger, let us on
the contrar)· dread our own faults, and though we alone may
be in the right, let us follo\v the multitude and act like them.
   XI. Give clear appreciation to merit and demerit, and deal
out to each its sure reward or punishment. In these days,
reward does not attend upon merit, nor punishment upon
crime. Ye high functionaries \vho have charge of public affairs,
let it be your task to make clear rewards and punishments.
   X I I. Let not the provincial authorities 1 or the Kuni no
Miyakko lev)' exactions on the people. In a country there are
not t\VO lords; the people have not two masters. The sovereign
is the nlaster of the people of the \vhole country. The officials
to whom he gives charge are all his vassals. How can they, as
well as the Government, presume to levy taxes on the people?
   XIII. Let all persons entrusted with office attend equally to
   1 The Interlinear Kana has Mikoto mochi.        The Kuni no Miyakko \vere
the old local nobles, \vhose po\ver \vas at this tilue giving way to that of the
Central Governnlent, represented in the provinces by the II         'PJ,or local
(-;ovcrnors.
           1~2                           NIHONGI.
            "

           their functions. Owing to their illness or to their being sent
           on missions, their work may sometimes be neglected. But
           whenever they become able to attend to business, let them be
           as accommodating as if they had had cognizance of it from
           before, and not hinder public affairs on the score of their not
           having had to do with them.
              XIV. Ye ministers and functionaries! Be not envious. For
           if we envy others, they in turn will envy us. The evils of envy
           know no limit. If others excel us in intelligence, it gives us
           no pleasure; if they surpass us in ability, we are envious.
           Therefore it is not until after a lapse of five hundred )'ears that
           we at last meet "vith a wise man, and even in a thousand years
           we hardly obtain one sage. But if we do not find wise men
           and sages, wherewithal shall the country be governed?
              XV. To turn away from that which is private, and to set our
           faces towards that which is public-this is the path of a
           Minister. Now if a man is influenced by private motives, he
           will assuredly feel resentments, and if he is influenced by
           resentful feelings, he will assuredly fail to act harmoniously with
           others. If he fails to act harmoniously with others, he will
           assuredly sacrifice the public interests to his private feelings.
           When resentment arises, it interferes with order, and is sub-
XXII   14. versive of law. Therefore in the first clause it was said, that
           superiors and inferiors should agree together. The purport is
           the same as this.
              XVI. Let the people be employed (in forced labour) at
           seasonable times. This is an ancient and excellent rule. Let
           them be employed, therefore, in the winter months, when they
           are at leisure. But from Spring to Autumn, when they are
           engaged in agriculture or with the mulberry trees, the people
           should not be so employed. For if they do not attend to
           agriculture, what will they have to eat? if they do not attend
           to the mulberr~y trees, what will they do for clothing?
              XVII. Decisions on important matters 1 should not be made
           by one person alone. They should be discussed with many.
           But small matters are of less consequence. It is unnecessary
           to consult a number of people. It is only in the case of the
           discussion of weighty affairs, when there is a ~uspicion that
            1 I venture to substitute
          editions.
                                        *,   great, for ,*, the reading of the printed
                                   SUIKO.                                  133
the)' may miscarry, that one should arrange matters in concert
with others, so as to arrive at the right conclusion.
   Autumn, 9th month. The Court ceremonies were reformed.
In connection \vith this measure, the follo\ving edict was
issued :-
   " On entering or leaving the Palace Gate, one must kneel on
both knees, \vith both hands pressed on the g-round, but it is
permitted to stand up and walk when the threshold is passed."
   In this month there were first established the Kibumi 1
painters and the Yamashiro painters.
   13th year, Summer, 4th month, 1st day. The Empress A.D. 60s.
commanded the Prince Imperial, the Oho-omi, and also the
Princes and Ministers, all to make a VO\V together, and there-
\vithal to begin to make copper 2 and embroidery images of
Buddha, sixteen feet high, one of each. She also commanded
I(uratsukuri no Tori 3 to be the engineer for the construction of

    1 The" Daishiden " (" History of Shotoku Daishi ") states that the Kibulni,

Yamashiro and other painters \vere instituted for the painting of Buddhist
pictures. They ,vere relieved frOln certain taxes and allo\ved to Inake this
their profession. 'There is SOBle doubt whether Kibumi is the nalne of a
place or not. It lneans literally yello\v \vriting, and sOlne think this is a
description of the Buddhist Sutras \vhich \vere ,vritten on tinted paper.
Kibumi is also applied to Chinese books.
    The Shukai quotes here a passage froln a Chinese History of the Liang
dynasty to the following effect :-" In A.D. 54 I Pekche sent frequent Envoys
\\'ith offerings of their national products. They also asked for a treatise on
the Nir\"ana Sutra, doctors of (ancient) Chinese poetry, and also artizans
and painters. These \vere granted by Inlperial cOlnlnand." This is not
the only evidence of the fact that silnultaneously \vith the streanl of Chinese
civilizing influences \vhich flo\ved fronl Corea to Japan at this period, there
\vas a corresponding current fronl China to Corea. The frequency of
Chinese names among the Corean elnigrants to Japan is a proof of this.
The" Seishiroku," a sort of peerage of Japan, cOlnpiled A.D. 814, sho\vs that
at that tinle nearly a third of the Japanese nobility traced their descent to
Corean or Chinese ancestors in sOlnething like equal proportions. The
Inelnbers are: China (Han), 162 families; Pekche, 1°4; }{oryo, 50; I111na,9,
and Silla, 9 ; doubtful, 47. Total, 381 foreign families out of a grand total of
I 177.   Many of these \vere descended froln teachers of \"arious kinds, and
all must have contributed to the spread of Chinese civilization in the country
of their adoption.
   ~ Fronl the " Daishiden': we learn that the " copper" \\'as an amalgam of
copper and gold in the proportion of 23,000 kin (pounds) of the former to
759 rio (ounces) of the latter.             :j i.e. Tori of the Saddlers' Be.
         134                            NIIIONGI.

           the Buddhas. At this time King Te-hung 1 of !{oryo, hearing
           that the Empress was making images of Buddha, sent tribute
           of 300 rio of the yellow metal.
              Intercalary 7th month, 1st day. The Prince Imperial
XXII. 15. ordered all the Princes and ~linisters to put on the outer
           garments called hirahi.
              Winter, loth Inonth. The Prince Imperial took up his abode
           in the Palace of Ikaruga.
 A.D. 606.
              14th year, Summer, 4th month, 8th day. Both the sixteen-
           foot images of Buddha, viz. that of copper and that of em-
           broidery, were finished, and on the same day the sixteen-foot
           copper image ,vas enshrined in the Golden Hall ~ of Gang()ji.
              Now this image of Buddha \vas too high for the door of
           the Golden Hall, ~nd it could not be got into it. Hereupon
           the workmen consulted together and proposed to break down
           the door of the Hall, and so bring in the image. By the skill,
           however, of Kuratsukuri no Tori they succeeded in bringing
           it into the Hall \vithout breaking down the door. On the
           same day a maigre entertainment 3 was given, at \vhich there
           assembled an innumerable multitude of people.
              Beginning with this year, festivals \vere held in all the
           temples on the 8th day of the 4t11 month and on the 15th
           da~y of the 7th month.
              5th IIlonth, 5th day. The Imperial commands ,,,ere given
           to Kuratsukuri no Tori, saying :-" It being my desire to
           encourage the Inner doctrines, I was about to erect a Buddhist
           Temple, and for this purpose sought for relics. Then thy
XXII. 16. grandfather, Shiba Tatto, offered me relics. Moreover, there
           were no monks or nuns in the land. Thereupon thy father,
           Tasuna, for the sake of the Emperor Tachibana no Toyohi,
           took priestly orders 4 and reverenced the Buddhist law. Also
           thine aunt Shimame was the first to leave her home and,
           becoming the forerunner of all nuns, to practise the religion
           of Shaka. Now, We desired to make a sixteen-foot Buddha,
           and to that end sought for a good image of Buddha. Thou
           didst provide a model which nlet OUf \vishes. ~foreover,

           1 This was not the nan1e of the Koryo king \vho reigned at this time.
           2 The Great Hall of the Temple \vhere the chief ilnage is installed.
           3 This tneans practically a religious service. See above, XX. 14.
           4 Lit. left his house.
                                SUIKO.                                135
when t.he image of Buddha was completed, it could not be
brought into the Hall, and none of the workmen could suggest
a plan of doing so. They were, therefore, on the point of
breaking down the door\vay, when thou didst manage to
admit it without breaking down the doorway. For all these
services of thine, vVe grant thee the rank of Dainin, and We
also bestow on thee twenty cho of water-fields 1 in the district
of Sakata in the province of Afumi." With the revenue
derived from this land, Tori built for the Empress the Temple
of Kongo-ji,2 now kno\yn as the nunnery of Sakata in ~Iina­
buchi.
   Autumn, 7th month. The Empress requested the Prince
Imperial to lecture on the Sho-man-gio.:; He completed his
explanation of it in three days.
    In this year the Prince Imperial also lectured on the Hok-
ke-kio 4 in the Palace of Okamoto.          The Empress was XXII. 17.
greatly pleased, and bestowed on the Prince Imperial one
hundred cho of \vater-fields in the Province of Harima. They
were therefore added to the Temple of Ikaruga.
    15th year, Spring, 2nd month, 1st day. A Mibu Be;) was A.D· 607.
established.
    9th day. The follo\ving edict was made :-" \\7e hear that
 Ou.r Imperial ancestors, in their governnlent of the world,
bending lowly under the sky and treading delicately on the
 ground, paid deep reverence to the Gods of Heaven and Earth.
 They everywhere dedicated temples to the 1110untains and
 rivers, and held mysterious communion \vith the powers of
 Nature. Hence the male and female elements became har-
 moniously developed, and civilizing influences blended together.
 And no\v in OUf reign, shall there be any remissness in the
 worship of the Gods of Heaven and Earth? Therefore let
 OUf Ministers with their whole hearts do reverence to the Gods
 of Heaven and Earth." 6

  1 i.e. rice-land.                           2 Diatnond.tflnple.

  3 A Sutra or Buddhist Scripture called in Sanskrit the 9rlmaHidevI-
simhanada.
  4 The Saddharma-pundarika-siitra.

  5 See Vol. I. p. 280. Also Florenz, Part I I I. p. 24.
  6 This edict is pure Chinese, and sounds very strangely frotn an Elnpress

who ,vas devoted to Buddhisln.
          J26                           NIHONGI.

              15th day. The Prince Imperial and the Oho-omi, accom-
           panied by all the functionaries, did \vorship to the Gods of
           Heaven and Earth.
              Autumn, 7th month, 3rd day. The Dairai; Imoko 'Vono
           no Omi, was sent to the Land of Great Thang. 2 Kuratsukuri
           no Fukuri \\raS appointed his interpreter.
              In the \\rinter of this year, the pond of Takechi, the pond of
XXII. 18. Fujihara, the pond of Kata\voka, and the pond of Sugahara
           were constructed in the province of Yamato, and a great
           canal was dug at Kurikuma in the province of Yamashiro.
           Moreover, in the province of Kahachi, the ponds of Tokari
           and Yosami ,vere made. Miyake \\rere also erected in all the
           provInces.
 A.D. 608.    16th year, Summer, 4th month. Imoko, \Vono no Omi,
            came back from the Land of Great Thang. The Thang
           country called him So In-ko. 3
              An envoy from Great Thang named P'ei Shih-ch'ing, \vith
           a suite of twelve persons, arrived at Tsukushi in company
           with Imoko no Omi. Wonari, Naniha no Kishi, \vas sent to
           bring the guests of Great Thang, P'ei Shih-ch'ing and the
           others, and a ne\v official residence was erected for them over
           the Kor)To official residence at Naniha.
              6th month, 15th day. The guests anchored in the harbour
           of Naniha. Thirty gaily decked boats were sent to meet them
           at Yeguchi (river-mouth), and they were lodged in the new
           official residence. Hereupon Torimaro, Nakatomi no Miya-
            15th rank. See above, p. 128.
           2  Thang,Ii,    is the Chinese dynasty of that name. China is here called
         Thang retrospectively, as that dynasty did not come into po\ver until 618.
         The epithet "great" is found in all the older editions, but the " Shukai "
          editor strikes it out. " Great" is prefixed in China to the name of the
         reigning dynasty only. Subsequent ,vriters omit it.
            Thang is in Japan pronounced To, as in Tojin, ,vhich in our o\vn day is
         (or perhaps I should say, was) a popular "'ord for foreigners of all nation-
         alities.
            3 So In-ko is  ii     US} ~. The t,,·o last characters are nleant as a
         phonetic representation of Imoko. The first is taken, according to Dr.
         Florenz, from Saga, to \vhich house Dr. Florenz says (on ,,,hat authority I
         do not kno\\') that Wano belonged. The Japanese CODlnlentators suggest
         that;; is merely a phonetic equivalent of Il" the first character of Wono
         (little moor). But this is open to the objection that these t,vo characters
         are not pronounced alike in China, though they are in Japan.
                                  SUIKO.                                 137
toko no Muraji, Nukade, Ohoshi Kahachi no Atahe and O-hei,
Fune no Fumibito, were appointed their official entertainers.
   Now Imoko no Omi represented to the Empress, saying:-
"When I \vas leaving, the Thang Emperor gave me a letter.
But while passing through the Land of Pekche, the men of
Pekche searched me and took it from me. Therefore I am
unable to present it." Hereupon the Ministers advised,
saying :-" An Envoy, though he lose his life, should not lose XXII. 19-
his message. Such is (the duty of) an Envoy! How can
anyone be so remiss in it as to lose the letter of the Great
Country?" And they accordingly condemned him to banish-
ment. Now the Empress made an order, saying :-" Although
Imoko is guilty of losing- the letter, \Ve cannot easily punish
him, for in that case the guest of the Great Country would
hear of it, and this is undesirable." So he was pardoned and
left unpunished.
   Autumn, 8th month, 3rd day. The Thang guests entered
the capital. On this day seventy-five caparisoned horses were
sent to meet the Thang guests on the Tsubaki no ichi high-
way, where Hirafu, Nukada be no Muraji, delivered a message
of welcome to them.
   12th day. The Thang guests ,vere summoned to Court,
and caused to state the object of their mission. Abe no Tori
no Omi and Idaku, Mononobe no Yosami no Muraji, acted as
introducers of the guests.
   Now the presents from the Land of Great Thang were
placed in the courtyard. Then the Chief Envoy, P'ei-Shih-
ch'ing, bearing in his own hands the letter (of credence), made
obeisance twice, and declared the purport of his mission. He
then stood up.
   This letter was as follows :-" The Emperor greets the
Sovereign of Wa. 1 Your Envoy, the provincial governor, the
   1 There is here a distinction made.       Emperor is written ~  Wi.   But
the latter of these characters is onlitted in describing the Sovereign of
Japan. Wa ,vas the ordinary name for Japan, both in China and Corea,
and in the latter cou~try it is in use to this day. The Japanese object to it,
and have never called their country by this name. The" Shaku-nihongi "
says :-" Wono no Imoko, the Envoy ,vho visited China, (proposed to) alter
this term into Nippon, but the Sui Etnperor ignored his reasons and \\'ould
not allow it. The term Nippon ,,'as first used in the period Wu-~feh, under
the Thang Dynasty (618-626)." Another Chinese authority gives 670 as
            J26                              NIHONCI.

XXII. 20.   I)airai, So In-ko, aIld his suite have arrived, and have gIven
            us full information.
               We having reverently received tIle precIous command 1
            (of Heaven), rule over the universe. It is Our desire to diffuse
            abroad Our civilizing influences, so as to cover all living
            things, and Our sentiment of loving nurture knows no dis-
            tinction of distance.
               N ow We learn that Your l\lajesty, dwelling separately
            beyond the sea, besto\vs the blessings of peace on your
            subjects, that there is tranquillity \vithin your borders, and
            that the manners and customs are nlild.
               vVith the most profound loyalt~y, you have sent Us tribute
            from afar, and \Ve are delighted at this admirable token of
            your sincerity.
               Our health is as usual, not\vithstanding the increasing
            ,varmth of the weather.
               Therefore We have sent P'ei-Shih-ch'ing, Official Enter-
            tainer of the Department charged \vith the Ceremonial for
            the reception of Foreign An1bassadors, and his suite, to notify
            to you the preceding. \Ve also transmit to you the products
            of \vhich a list is given separately."
               Then Abe no On1i came for\vard, received the letter, and
            advanced with it. Ohotomo no Kurafu no l\furaji came out to
            meet him, and received the letter, \vhich he laid on a table
            before the Great Gate, and reported to the Empress. \Vhen
            the ceremony was over, they (the Chinese Ambassador and hig
            suite) retired. 2
               On this occasion, the In1perial Princes, the other Princes,
             and the ~Iinisters all ,vore golden hair ornaments on their
             heads, and their clothing was all of brocade, purple, and
             embroider)', \vith various-coloured figured thin silks.
                     In one writing it is stated that the colour of the garments
                  corresponded in all cases \vith that of the official caps.

            the date ,vhen Nippon began to be officially used in China. The" Tong-
            kaln " gives the saIne date as that in \vhich the Japanese officially notified this
            tern1 to the Corean (;overnlnent as the proper appellation of their country.
               1 The Dei gratia of Europ ean Sovereig-ns.
               2 I t appears fro III this and other passages that at this period the Court

            was literally the courtyard in front of the Enlperor~s Hall of Audience.
            N one but the principal :\Iinisters entered the Hall itself.
                                    SUIKO.                                139
   16th day. The Thang guests were entertained at Court.
   9th month, 5th day. The guests were entertained at Oho-
kohori in Naniha.
  11th day. The Thang guest, P'ei Shih-ch'ing, took his
departure. Accordingly, Wono no Imoko no Omi was
appointed Chief Envoy, Kishi no Wonari Second Envoy, and
Fukuri Interpreter. They were despatched in company with
the Thang guests. N ow the Emperor addressed the Thang
Emperor in the following terms : -
  "The Emperor of the East respectfully addresses the
Emperor of the \Vest. l Your Envoy, P'ei Shih-ch'ing, Official XXII. 21.
Entertainer of the Department of foreign receptions, and his
suite, having arrived here, my long-harboured cares were
dissolved. This last month of autumn is somewhat chilly.
How is Your Majesty ? We trust well. We are in our usual
health. We now send the Dairai, So In-ko, the Dairai, Wonari,
and others to you. This is respectfully presented, but
informal. "
   At this time there were sent to the Land of Thang the
students Fukuin, Yamato no Aya no Atahe, Emyo, Nara no
Wosa,2 Kuromaro, Takamuku no A:yabito, and Ohokuni, Imaki
no Ayabito, together with the student-priests Hifumi (or Nichi-
bun), Imaki no Ayabito, Shoan, Minabuchi no Ayabito, Eon,
Shiga no Ayabito, and K6sai, Imaki no Ayabito, in all eight
persons.
   In this year many persons from Silla came to settle in
Japan.
   17th year, Summer, 4th month, 4th day.                 The Viceroy 3 of A.D. 609.

  1   Emperor is here in the first case   X ~ (Tenno) ; in the second ~ 16    11




(K6~tei).
  A Chinese History of the Thang dynasty gives a different version of the
opening words of this letter. It says: "The Emperor (~ ~) of the
place where the sun comes forth addresses a letter to the Emperor (~ ~)
of the place where the sun sets." The Chinese Elnperor complained of the
rudeness of this barbarian letter. It is pretty clear frOlll this incident that
the word Nippon (sun-origin) for Japan was not yet in use officially. Cf.
" Ish6nihonden," 1. 22.
  ~ \Vosa Ineans interpreter. No doubt the name and office here coincided.
  :J From very early times Kiushiu, or such part of it as submitted to the

Tenno's rule, ,vas governed by a viceroy, as I have ventured to translate
Dazai *~. Vide" Early Japanese History," p. 56. Hereditary kings
         J26                               NIHONGI.

           Tsukushi reported to the Empress that Buddhist priests from
           Pekche, named To-heun and Hye-mi,t at the head of ten
           others and seventy-five laymen, had anchored in the harbour
           of Ashigita in the province of Higo. Then Tokomaro, Naniha
           no Kishi, and Tatsu, Funa no Fumibito, \vere sent to ask
           them why they came. They ans\vered and said :-." The
XXII. 22. King of Pekche commanded us to go on a mission to the Land
           of Wu.~ In that country', however, there is civil ,var. \Ve
           were not allowed to enter it, and were returning to our own
           land again ,vhen we suddenly met \vith a storm, and were
           tossed about upon the sea, until most fortunately we anchored
           on the Imperial coast. At this \ve were greatly rejoiced."
               5th month, r6th da)r. Tokomaro and his companion
           returned, and made their report to the Empress. Tokomaro
           and Tatsu were straight,vay sent back to accompany the men
           of Pekche, and to escort them to their o\vn country. \Vhen
           they arrived at Tsushima, the ten priests all expressed a \vish
           to remain (in Japan), and the matter having been laid before
           the Government, they were permitted to do so. Accordingly,
           they were caused to d\vell in the Temple of Gangoji.
               Autumn, 9th month. Imoko, W ono no ami, came back
           from the Land of Great Thang. Only the Interpreter Fukuri
           did not return.
 A.D. 610.     18th year, Spring, 3rd month. The King of Kor~yo sent
            tribute of Buddhist priests named Tam-chhi and Pop-chong.
           Tam-chhi knew the five (Chinese) classics.:~ He \vas more-
           over skilled in preparing painters' colours, paper, and ink. He
           also made mills. This \vas apparently the first time that n1ills
           were made. 4
               Autumn, 7th month. An Envoy from Silla named Chuk-
         of Ito are mentioned in the Chinese annals as ruling in the north of Kiushiu
         under the sovereign of Yamato in the 3rd century. The Interlinear I~ana
         gives Oho-tnikoto-mochi, Great-august- thing-holder, as the Japanese
         equivalent for Dazai. But I am disposed to think that this is a mere trans-
         lation, like ll1any of the Kana renderings of Chinese titles, and that this
         \vord ,vas not a real title of the viceroy.
            1 In Japanese Dakin and Erni.

            2 \Vu is of course here a mere geographical ternl.         The Honan country is
         intended.
              17ide "Mayers' Chinese Manual," p. 315.
            4 It is not quite clear \"hat sort of filills is intended.  Probably hand-mills.
                                    SUIKO.                                 22

sye-sa, Nama 1 of Satok-pu, and an Imna Envoy named Syu
Chi-me, Te-sya 2 of Tok-pu, arrived in Tsukushi.                XXII. 23·
   9th month. Messengers were sent to fetch the Envoys from
Silla and I mna.
   Winter, loth month, 8th day. The Envoys from Silla and
Imna arrived in the capital. On this day Hirafu, N ukadabe no
Muraji, was made Chief Officer over the caparisoned horses
sent to meet the Silla guests, and Ohotomo, Kashihade no
Omi, Chief Officer over the caparisoned horses sent to meet the
Imna guests. Accordingly they were lodged in the official
building at Kahabe in Ato.
   9th day. The Envoys paid their respects at Court. On
this occasion Kahakatsu, Hada no Miyakko, and U sagi, Hashi
no Muraji, were ordered to act as introducers for Silla, and
Shiwo-futa, Hashibito no M uraji, and Ohoko, Abe no ami, as
introducers for Jmna. They brought them in together by the
South Gate, and made them stand in the middle of the Court.
Now, Ohotomo no Kurafu:l no Muraji, Soga no TO)TOra no
Yemishi no Omi, Sakamoto no Nukade no Omi and Abe no
Toriko no Olni got up together from their places, and going
forward, prostrated themselves in the Court. Hereupon the
guests of the two countries each made repeated obeisance, and
declared the purport of their mission. Then the four Daibu
stood up, and going forward, informed the Oho-omi. The
Oho-omi got up from his place, and standing before the Hall,
listened to their statement. When this WclS done, all the
guests were given presents, each according to his rank.
   17th day. The guests were entertained at Court. Nihe,
Kahachi no Aya no Atahe was made table-companion for
Silla, and Kuso, Nishikori no Obito, table-companion for
Imna.
   23rd day. The ceremonies of the reception of the guests
having come to a close, they went away.
   19th year, Summer, 5th month, 5th day. The Empress A.D. 611.
went to gather medicinal herbs on the plain of Uda. 4

  1 Nama is a Silla official title-the 13 th rank.  The original has Nalni,
\vrongly, I think. Satok-pu is the name of a place.
  ~ Te-sya was the 12th official rank in Silla.            3 Or Kuhi.
  4   This was the day fixed for this purpose by the Calendar.   The custon1 is
frequently mentioned by later \vriters.   The herbs gathered ,vere mushrooms,
  VOL. II.                                                           L
             J26                            NIl-IONGI.

XXII. 24.     At cockcrow they assembled by~ the pond of Fujihara, and
           at daybreak they set out. Ahata no Hosome no Omi was
           made to lead the van, ,vhile Nukadabe no Hirafu no Muraji
           brought up the rear. On this day the colour of the clothing of
           the various Ministers agreed vvith the colour of their official
           caps. The)~ each wore hair ornaments, which in the case
           both of the Daitoko and Shotoko \vere made of gold, of the
           Dainin and Shonin of leopards' tails, and of the Dairai and
           lo,ver ranks of birds' tails. 1
              Autumn, 8th month. Silla sent Peuk-cheul-chi, 2 Nama of
           Satok-pu, alld Jmna sent Chhin-chi and Chu-chi, the Te-s)'a
           of Seup-pu together, \vith tribute.
 A.D. 612.    20th year, Spring, 1St month, 7th day. A banquet, \vith
           sake, was given to all the high functionaries. On this da)',
           the Oho-omi proposed the health of the Empress, and sang a
           song, sayIng:-

                                \Vhen I look 011 the august sky, a
                                Whence there stands forth,
                                From its manifold fence (of clouds)
                                Which conceals her,
                                The Great Sovereign
                                Who rules us tranquilly,
                                For Inyriads of ages (say \ve)
                                May it ever be thus!
                                For thousands of ages too
                                May it ever be thus!
                                \Vith deep reverence
                                \Ve would serve her;
                                With profound obeisance
XXII. 25.                       \\,Te ,vould serve her;
                                And so ends my song.



            fungus {or moxa or scented flag for Inaking the perfumed and gaily-
            ornamented balls called Kusu-danla, hung up by the Japanese in their
            temples and houses. Also various other herbs.
                1 In Loochoo at the present day rank is indicated by the material of the

            hair-pin. See Chamberlain in " ].A.S.T."
               :1 The traditional transliteration is Horinchi.

               3 The Empress's appearance al110ng her courtiers is compared to the sun

            (froln whom she is descended) issuing {rOln among the clouds. The nletre is
            regular naga-uta.
                                 SUII{O.                                143
 The Empress replied, saying:-
                   My good Saga !
                   The sons of Soga-
                   \Vere they horses,
                   They ,vould be steeds of Hiuga :
                   \ \'ere they s\\'ords,
                   They ,vould be good blades of Kure. 1
                   Right indeed
                   Seems the Great Sovereign
                   1'0 have in her service
                    The sons of Soga !

  2nd month, 28th day. The body of the former Empress..
consort Katashi..hime 2 was removed and re-interred in the
Great Misasagi of Hinokuma.
  On this day funeral orations were pronounced on the Karu J
high\vay. First of all, Tori, Abe no Uchi no Omi, pronounced
an eulogistic decree of the Empress, and made offerings to the
spirit of the deceased of such things as sacred utensils and
sacred garments,4 fifteen thousand kinds in all.
   Secondly, the Imperial Princes, each in the order of their
rank, pronounced funeral orations. Thirdly, 'Vomaro, Naka-
tomi no Miyatokoro no Muraji, pronounced the eulogistic
address of the Oho-omi. Fourthly, the Oho-ami, at the head
of the Omi of the eight families,5 caused Marise, Sakahibe no XXII. 26.
Omi, to read the ,vritten eulogiums of the nobility.6 The
people 6f that time said that Marise and Womaro delivered
their eulogiums well, but that Tori no Omi delivered his badly.
   5th month, 5th day. An excursion was made to gather
medicinal herbs. They assembled at Hada and proceeded
together to the Court. The dress was the same as for the
 Uda excursion.
   1 Kure is Wu in China.     See above, XXI I. 22. The" Shiki }) says this is
the name of a good sword.
  2 \Vife of I(imlnei Tenno and 1110ther of YOluei Tenno and Suiko Tenno.

The Misasagi named \vas that of her husband. This is a case of double
interLnent. Two stone coffins have been found in Saine l11isasagi.
   :\ Or Karo.
   4 The" Shukai" gives ,vhat appears to me a violent and unnecessary

emendation of this passage.
   5 Lit. bellies.  Eight is here used loosely for a great nU111ber, all.
   r. .re~.     In Japanese Uji and Kahane, i.e. noble houses and titles or
surnalnes.
          J26
          144                            NIHONGI.

               This year a man emigrated from Pekche whose face and
            body were all flecked with white, being perhaps affected with
            white ringworm. People disliking his extraordinary appear-
            ance, wished to cast him away on an island in the sea. But
            this man said :-" If you dislike my spotted skin, you should not
            breed horses or kine in this country which are spotted with
            white. Moreover, I have a small talent. I can make the
            figures of hills and mountains. If you kept me and made use
            of me, it would be to the advantage of the country. Why
            should you waste me by casting me away on an island of the
            sea?" Hereupon they gave ear to his words and did not cast
            him away. Accordingly he was made to draw the figures of
            Mount Sumi 1 and of the Bridge of Wu in the Southern Court.
            The people of that time called him by the name of Michiko no
            Takumi, and he was also called Shikomaro.'
               Another man of Pekche named Mimachi emigrated to
            japan. He said that he had learned from Wu their style of
            music and dancing. He was accordingly lodged at Sakurawi,
            and young people collected who were made to learn from him
            these arts. Hereupon Deshi,3 Manu no Obito, and Seibun,
XXII 27. Imaki no Ayabito, learned dancing from him, and handed it
            down (to their pupils).
 A.D. 61 3.    21St ye~r, Winter, 11th month. The ponds of Waki no
            Kami, U nebi, and Wani were constructed, and a great
            highway laid from Naniha to the capital. 4
               12th month, 1st day. The Prince Imperial took a journey
            to Katawoka. Now a starving man was lying by the road-
            side. He asked his name, but there was no answer. The
            Prince Irnperial, seeing this, gave him to eat and to drink,
            and taking off his own raiment, clothed with it the starving
            man, saying to him, " Lie in peace." Then he made a song,
            sayIng : -
                                          Alas! for
                                    The wayfarer lying
                                    An hungered for rice
                                    On the hill of Katavv·oka


            1 In Sanskrit, SUlneru.   The central Inountain or axis of every universe,
         the support of the tiers of heaven, according to the Buddhist system.
           2 Shiko Ineans ugly.                            3 Deshi means pupil.

           -I Which was then at Tachibana in Yamato.
                                   SUII{O.                               145
                           (The sunshiny).
                           Art thou becolne
                           Parentless ?
                           Hast thou no lord
                           Flourishing as a bamboo?
                           Alas! for
                           The wayfarer lying
                           An hungered for rice ~ 1

   2nd day. The Prince lrnperial sent a messenger to see the
starving man. The messenger returned and said :-" The
starving man is already dead." Hereupon the Prince Imperial
was greatly grieved, and accordingly caused him to be buried
at that place, a mound erected, and firmly closed. 2
   Many days after, the Prince In1perial called for his personal XXII. 28.
attendants, and said to them :-" The starving man who was
lying on a former day on the road was no ordinary man. He
must have been an upright man. -, A messenger was sent to
see. On his return he reported that when he went to the
mound and made inspection, the heaped..up earth had not
been disturbed, but on opening the tomb and looking in, there
was no corpse. It was empty, and there was nothing but the
garment folded up and laid on the coffin. Thereupon the
Prince Imperial sent the messenger back a second time to
fetch the garment, which l1e continued wearing as before.
   The people of that time wondered much at this, and said : -
" How true it is that a sage knoweth a sage." And they stood
more and more in awe of him.
   22nd year, SUlnmer, 5th month, 5th day. An excursion for A.D. 61 4.
medicinal herbs was made.
  6th month, 13th day. Mitasuki, Inugami no Kimi, and
Yatabe no Miyakko were sent to the Land of Great Thang.
  Autumn, 8th month. The Oho-omi fell ill. For his sake a
thousand persons, men and women, entered religion.
  23rd year, Autumn, 7th month. Mitasuki, Inugami no Kimi, A.D. 61 5.
  1   Metre, irregular naga-uta.
  2   There \vas a passage leading to the interior of burial mounds of persons
of some rank, which was closed \\'ith earth and stones after the interment.
I t is possibly this process which is intended by the ternl tt, \vhich Ineans
both to seal and to pile up earth. In the case of the burial of a vagrant,
however, it is more probable that there was no vault, but Silllply a heap of
earth raised over the grave.
          J26                               NIHONGI.

             and Yatabe no Mi)rakko arrived from the Land of Great
             Thang. An envo)~ from Pekche accompanied Inugami no
             Kimi to our Court.
                11th month, 2nd day. A banquet was given to the Pekche
             guest.
                11th day. The !(oryo Buddhist priest Rye-Chit returned
             to his country.
 A.I>. 616.     24th year, Spring, 1St month. Peach trees and plum trees
             bore fruit. l
                3rd month. Three men from the Island of Yaku ~ came
             hither as emigrants~
XXII. 29·       Summer, 5th month. Seven persons from Yaku arrived.
                Autumn, 7th month. Twenty more persons arrived from
            Yaku. There were first and last in all thirty persons. They
            ,vere all settled in Eno,vi. They never went away again, but
            all died there.
                Autumn, 7th nlo11th. Silla sent the Nama, Chuk Sy-e-sa,
            \\lith tribute of an ill1age of Buddha. 3
 A.D. 617.      25 th year, Summer, 6th nl0nth. It was reported from the
            province of Idzumo that there \vas in the district of Kanda a
            gourd of the size of an amphora."
                In this year there \vere good crops of the five kinds of grain.
 A.D. 6Ig.     26th )""ear, Autumn, 8th month, 1st day. Koryo sent envoy's
            with tribute of local productions, and reported that Yang-Ti 5
            of the Sui dy'nasty llad invaded that country with a force of
            300,000 men, but had, on the contrary, been beaten by them:i
XXII. 30. They therefore sent a present of two captives, named Chen-
            kung and P'u-t'ung, with such things as flutes, cross-bows,
            and catapults-tell in all. The)r also sent one camel, bred in
            their country.

            1 In a sin1ilar notice belo\\', XXI I. 39, the author is satisfied ,,·ith the

         n10re probable stateillent that they blossollled.
            ~ Off the south coast of Satsull1a.
            :-1 A later \vork infonns us that this image "vas of gold, t,,·o feet high. It
         \vas set up in H6k6ji. It sent forth rays of light, and worked ll1iracles frOlll
         time to tilue.
           4 Some understand here a ll1usical instrument, the body of ,,'hich \\'as of

         earthenware.
           5 Reigned 60 5-6 1 7.

           (j This statelnent is corroborated both by Chinese and Corean history.

         The events referred to took place in A.D. 612.
                                    SUIKO.                                 147
   This y'ear Kahabe no Omi 1 \vas sent to the province of Aki
with orders to build ships. On arriving at the mountain, he
sought for ship timber. Having found good timber, he marked
it and was about to cut it, ,,,hen a n1an appeared, and said : -
"This is a thunder-tree, and must not be cut." Kahabe no
Omi said :-" Shall eyen the Thunder-god oppose the Imperial
commands?" So having offered man~y mitegura/ he sent
workmen to cut do\vn the timber. Straight\vay a great rain
fell, and it thundered and lightened. Hereupon Kahabe no
Omi dre,v his s\vord, and said :-" 0 Thunder-god, harm not
the \vorkmen; it is m~y person that thou shouldst injure.~' So
he looked up and \vaited. But although the God thundered more
than ten times, he could not harm Kahabe no Omit Then
he changed himself into a small fish, \vhich stuck between the XXII. 3 1•
branches of the tree. Kahabe no Omi forthwith took the fish,
and burnt it. So at last the ships ,vere built.
   27th year, Summer, 4th month, 4th day. It ,vas reported A.D. 619-
from the province of .J. \fumi that in the river Gamafu a there \vas
a creature in the shape of a man. I
   Autumn, 7th month. There ,vas a fisherman of the pro-
vince of Settsu, ,vho cast his net in the Horiye. 5 . Something
entered his net formed like a child, ,vhich ,vas neither a fish
nor a man. Its name ,vas unkno,vn.
   28th y'e3.r, Autunln, 8th month. T\vo men of \"'aku \vere A.D. 620.
cast a,va.y on the island of Idzu. 6
   Autumn, loth month. The top of the Misasagi'i of Hina-
kuma ,vas covered \vith pebbles. Outside the boundar)T the
earth was piled up into a hill, and each of the noble houses"

    1 I have omitted here and in several other places a frivolous note of the

" Orig-inal Commentary," to the effect that " the personal nall1e is \vanting.:;
    ~ Offerings of cloth.
    :~ (~amo.                            .. A bad Olllen.
   ~ Hori-ye is literally an artificial canal. Here it is the nanle of a branch
of the river at Osaka, no doubt originally artificially excavated.
   (; Probably l"ries Island, or one of the adjacent islands. Or Shinla Ina)'"
here mean promontory.
  i At this day several of the misasagi are thickly covered ,vith a layer of
paving-stones, loosely put do,,'n, probably in order to prevent the earth fronl
being washed a,vay by rains. An example Inay be seen at Tarulni, near
Kobe, and another on the hill above Nara.
  6 Uji.
         J26                              NIHONGI.

           was charged to erect a great pillar 1 on the top of the hill of
           earth. Now the pillar set up by Yamato no Aya no Saka no
           Uhe no Atahe was very much higher than the others, and the
           men of that time gave him the name of Ohohashira (great ..
           pillar) no Atahe.
              12th month, 1st day. There was a red appearance in the
           sky, over a rod in length, and resembling the tail of a fowl in
           shape.
XXII. 32 •    This year, the Prince Imperial, in concert with Shima no
           Oho-omi, drew up a history of the Emperors, a history of the
           country, and the original record of the Omi, the ~Iuraji, the
           Torno no Miyakko, the Kllni no Miyakko, the 180 Be, and the
           free subjects. 2
 A.D. 621.    29th year, Spring, 2nd month, 5th day. In the middle of
           the night the Imperial Prince l\fiimayado no Toyotomimi no
           Mikoto died in the Palace of Ikaruga. At this time all the
           Princes and Omi, as \yell as the people of the Empire, the old,
           as if they had lost a dear child, had no taste for salt and
           vinegar 3 in their mouths, the young, as if they had lost a
           beloved parent, filled the ways with the sound of their
           lamenting. The farmer ceased from his plough, and the
           pounding woman laid do\vn her pestle. They all said :-" The
           sun and moon have lost their brightness; heaven and earth
XXII. 33· have crumbled to ruin: henceforward, in whom shall we put
           our trust? "
              In this month the Prince Imperial Kamitsumiy'a 4 was
           buried in the Shinaga Misasagi.
              At this time Hye-cha, the Buddhist priest of Karyn, heard
           of the death of the Prince Imperial Kamitsumiya, and was
           greatly grieved thereat. He invited the priests, and in honour
           of the Prince Imperial gave them a meal,s and explained the
           sacred books in person. On this day he prayed, saying:-
            " In the land of Nippon there is a sage, by name the Imperial

           1 These pillars \\rere probably of \\'ood.  No trace of theln no,," rel11ains.
         Dr. Florenz says the custom of erecting pillars \vas introduced by the
         Buddhists. This is the first luention of it.
           2 This is the \vork after\rards kno\vn as the "Kiujihonki," "Kiujiki," or

         "Kujiki." See belo\v, XXI\". 26.
           3 To be understood generally of ",·ell·flavoured food.

           4 Prince Miima}Tado.                    S Of vegetarian food only.
                                    SCIK.O.                                149

 Prince I(amitsumiya Toyotomimi.         Certainly Heaven has
freely endo\ved hin1 \vith the yirtues of a sage. 1 Born in the
 Land of Nippon,~ he thoroughly possessed the three funda-
 mental principles) J he continued the great plans of the
former sages.      He reverenced the Three I~recious Things,"
and assisted the people in their distress. He was truly a great
sage. And now the Prince Imperial is dead. I, although a
foreigner, was in heart closely united to him. Now what
a vails it that I alone should survive? I have determined to
die on the 5th day of the 2nd month of next year. 5 So shall I
tneet the Prince Imperial I~amitsumiya in the Pure Land, and
together \vith him pass through the ll1etemps}Tchosis of all
living creatures." No\v \vhen the appointed day came, Hye-
chit died, and all the people of that day said one to another : - XXII. 34.
'it Prince Kamitsumiya is not the only sage, Rye-chit is also a
sage." 6
    This year Silla sent the Nama, Imime, with tribute and a
1l1emorial, stating to the Empress the object of his mission.
It was perhaps from this tilne that Silla began to present
memorials.
    30th year, Autumn, 7th month. Silla sent as ambassador A. D. 622.
the Nama, Chi-syon-i, and Imna sent the Talsol Nama, Chi.
They canle to Court together, and brougllt tribute of a golden
image of Buddha, a golden pagoda, and relics, also a great
baptismal flag'; with twelve smaller ones. NO\\T the image of


    ISee Legge's" Confucian Analects," p. 81.
    2Whether or not the previous exalnples of the usc of the characters
a    i.$. (Nippon) for Japan are authentic, or tllcrcly introduced retro"
spectively by later conlpllers, the present instance is probably a genuine
case of its use. It is natural to suppose that it \vas-uscd in an infonnal way
for son1C tilne before it \vas used officially.
   There is here, no doubt, an allusion to the lncaning of !\ippon, viz.
H Origin of the sun.~)
  ~ Viz. Heaven, Earth, and Man. The lneaning- is that he ,y;\s a philo-
sophcr.
  4 Buddha, !Jhanna, and Samg-ha.

  :I The anniversary of the Prince's death.

  6 The" l\:iujiki " ends here.

  i The Buddhist baptisln consists in \vashing· the top of the head \\,ith per-
fUlned water. The baptislnal flags \vere so called because they had the
salnc cfficacy, raising those \vho passed under thClll first to the statlls of a
         J26                               NIHONGI.

          Buddha was placed in the Hada 1 Temple at I{adono. The
          other articles, namely the relics, the golden pagoda, and the
          baptismal flags, were all deposited in Shitenoji.2 At this
          time, the Buddhist priests E-sai and E-ko, with the phy-
          sicians E-jitsu and }1"'uku-in, students of the learning of Great
          Thang, arrived in company with Chi-syon-i and the others.
          Now E-jitsu and the rest made together a representation to
          the Empress, saying :-" Those who have resided in Thang
          for study a have all completed their courses, and ought to be
          sent for. Moreover, the Land of Great Thang is an admirable
          country, whose laws are complete and fixed. Constant COIll-
          munication should be kept up with it."
             This year Silla invaded Irona,· and Imna became a depen-
XXII. 35. dency of Silla. The Empress thought of invading Silla, and
          consulted with the Oho-omi. She also asked the opinion of
          all the Ministers. Then Tanaka no Omi answered and
          said :--" An invasion should not be too hastily undertaken.
          It will not be too late to attack when we have first learnt the
          condition of affairs and ascertained that they are (really)
          mutinous. I pray that the experiment be made of sending an
          envoy thither to vie\,y the state of things."
             Runi, Nakatomi 110 Muraji, said :-" Imna is originally an
          inner Miyake of ours. The Silla people have now attacked
          and taken possession of it. I pray that our troops be disci-
          plined, that Silla be chastised, and Imna taken from it and
          given to pekche. Would not this be better than that it should
          be possessed by Silla?" Tanaka no Omi said :-" Not so!
         Tchakra Radja (vide Eitel), and ultitnately of a Buddha. Fishes were
         benefited by such flags being floated down a river.
            There is at the present day a survival of this practice in the Nagare-
         kanjo (kanjo means baptislll, or head-sprinkling), described in Yamada's
         Dictionary as follo\vs :-" Four posts are set up near ,vater, on which white
         cloth is hung. To this are attached leaves of lign-aloes, etc., as offerings
         for the benefit of the souls of the friendless dead, of drowned persons, or of
         still-born children." There is an interesting account of the nagare-kanjo
         in a little book called" Our Neighbourhood,n by T. A. P. (the late Dr.
         Purcell, of Tokio).
            1 Called the Hachhvoka Tenlple above.

            2 At Osaka.   See above, 1st year of reign.          3 See above, XX I I. 2 I •

            .. The "Tongkanl" says nothing of this. Pekche and Silla were on
         hostile terms about this time. Besides, the do\vnfall of Imna is already
         mentioned above.
                                    SVIKO.                               J26

Pekche is a very changeable country.l Eyen on the roads
they lie.     Everything they ask for is unjust. Therefore
 (Imna) should not be given over to Pekche.·· So the expe-
dition \vas not carried out.     Hereupon Kishi no Ihakane
,vas sent to Silla, and I,-ishi no I{uranoshita to In1na, to
inquire into the Imna affairs.
   Now the Lord of Silla sent eight Daibu to inform Ihakane
of the affairs of Silla and Kuranoshita of the affairs of
Imna. Therefore they promised as folIoVt's :-" Imna, though
a small country, is a dependency of the Empress. Why
should Silla unceremoniously take possession of it? Let it
be once for all recognized to be, as always, an inner !\liyake
(of Japan), and we pray let there be no n10re trouble about it."'
   So the Nama, Chi-syi)n-i, was sent along ,vith Kishi no
Ihakane and an Imna man, the 1~alsol Nama named Chi,
along \vith Kishi no Kuranoshita to bring tribute frorn both XXII. j<l.
countries. But that same year, before Ihakane and the other
had returned, the Daitoko, \Vomaro, Sakahibe no Omi, and
the Shotoko, Kuni, N akatomi no ~I uraji, \yere appointed
generals of the first rank; the Sh()toko, ~ edzu, I(ahabe no
Omi, the Shotoko, Itto, ~10nonobe no Yosami no Muraji, the
Shotoko, Hironiha, Hada no Omi, the Shutoko Ihifuta,
Afumi no Ashimi no Omi, the Shotoko, L shi, Heguri no Omi,
the Shotoko, Ohotomo no ~1 uraji, and the Shutoko, Ikusa,
()hoyake no Omi, were made assistant-generals.
   1"hey invaded Silla with an army of several tens of thou-
sands of men. Now Ihakane and the others had assembled
at the port, and were waiting for a fair ,vind and smooth sea
in order to embark.      Hereupon a numerous naval force
arrived, filling the sea. The Envoys of the t\VO countries,
gazing upon it, were struck with alarm, and returned home.
   In their stead, Kamchi Te-chhang 2 was made tribute-
bearer for Imna, and came with an offering of tribute. Here-
upon Ihakane and his colleague said to one another :-" The
outbreak of this war is contrary to the previous agreement,
therefore the Imna affairs cannot now be settled." So they
put to sea, and crossed over to Japan. The generals, ho\v-
  1   Pekche is so described in the" Tongkam."
  2   Te-chhang, as the" Shukai " suggests, is probably a Inistake for Te-sya,
a Silla official title.
          J26                           NIHONGI.

            ever, first went to Imna, and having held a consultation, were
            abol1t to attack Silla. Hereupon the King of the Land of
            Silla, hearing that a large force had arrived, became appre-
            hensive and tendered his submission. Then the generals
            consulted together, and forwarded a memorial, which ,vas
            granted by the Empress.
              Winter, 11th month. Ihakane, Kuranoshita, and the rest
            returned from Silla. Thereupon the Oho-omi inquired the
            state of affairs there. They ans\vered and said :-" Silla
            received the Imperial commands with profound respect, and
           accordingly designated t\VO special Envoys to deliver tribute
           from the two countries. But when they sa,v a naval force
           arrive, the Envoys with tribute for our Court went home
           again. The tribute, however, has been brought, not\vith-
           standing this." Hereupon the Oho-omi said :-" \Vhat a pity
           that the army was despatched so soon! "
              The men of that time said that this war was o\ving to
XXII. 37. Sakahibe no Omi and Adzumi no Muraji having formerly'!
           received many presents from Silla, and that they had again
           urged the Oho-omi, with the consequence that the expedition
           was despatched before receiving the Envoy's report. 2 "
              Before this time, \vhen Ihakane and his colleague crossed
           over to Silla, a gaily-decorated boat came to meet them at a bay
           as they were approaching the harbour. Ihakane inquired:-
           " To what country does this boat sent to meet us belong? "
           They answered and said :-" It is a Silla boat." Ihakane again
           said :-" Why is there no boat to meet us from Imna? " A
           second boat was at once added on behalf of Imna. The
           practice of Silla sending t,vo boats to meet our Envo}Ts began
           from this time.
              From spring till autumn there were heavy rains and floods,
           and the five grains did not reach maturity.
 A.D. 623.    3 1 st year, Spring, 4th month, 3rd day. There ,vas a
           Buddhist priest who took an axe and smote therewith his
           paternal grandfather. 3 No\v the Empress, hearing of this,

           1  i.e. in the 8th year of this reign.
           2  So that they lnight have again an opportunity of levying blackmail on
         Silla.
           3 The interlinear Kana gives here oya, parent.   This tnay serve as an
         example of the inaccuracy of these g-losse~.
                                 SUIKO.                                  153
sent for the aha-ami, and gave command, say'ing :-" The
man who has entered religion should be devoted to the. Three
Precious Things, and should cherish devoutly the prohibitions
of the Buddhist law. Ho\v can he without compunction be
readil~y guilty of crime? "T e now hear that there is a priest
who has struck his grandfather. Therefore, let all the priests
and nuns of the various temples be assembled, and investi..
gation made. Let severe punishment be inflicted on any \vho
are convicted of offences." Hereupon the priests and nuns
were all assembled, and an examination held. The wicked
priests and nuns were all about to be punished, \",hen K \val..
leuk, a Buddhist priest of Pekche, presented a nlen10rial, as
follows :-" The law of Buddha came from the ,\restern
Countr)' to Han. l Three hundred years later it \vas handed
on to Pekche, since which time barely one hundred )·ears had
elapsed, \vhen aUf King, hearing that the Emperor of Nippon XXII. 38.
\vas a \vise man, sent him tribute of an image of Buddha and
of Buddhist Sutras. Since that time, less than one hundred
years have passed, and consequently the priests and nuns
have not ~yet learned the Buddhist laws, and readil)9 commit
\vickedness. On this account all the priests and nuns are
afraid, and do not know what to do. I humbly pray that
with the exception of the wicked (priest \vho struck his grand..
[nther) all the other priests and nuns may be pardoned and
not punished. That would be a work of great merit."
   Accordingly the Empress granted (his petition).
   13th day. A decree was made as follows :-" If even the
priests continue to offend ag-ainst the la\v, ,vhere\vithal shall
the laymen be admonished? Therefore from this time for..
,yard we appoint a Soja and a Sodzu for the superintendence
of the priests and nuns."
   17th day. The priest I(wal..leuk \vas appointed Soja, and
 Kurabe no Tokuseki was made Sodzu. On the same day
Adzumi no Muraji was made Hoto.~
   Autumn, 9th month, 3rd day. There was an inspection of
the temples, and of the priests and nuns, and an accurate
record nlade ot the circumstances of the building of the
  1 The Chinese dynasty of that name.
  2 Lit. head of the la\'~' (of Buddha).   This \vas the chief official of the
!)cpartment of the Buddhist religion.
         J26                           NIHONGI.

           temples, and also of the circumstances under which the priests
           and nuns embraced religion, with the year, month and day of
           their taking orders. There were at this time 46 temples, 816
           priests, and 569 nuns-in all, 1385 persons.
              Winter, loth month, 1St day. The Oho-ami sent the two
           Ministers, Adzumi no M uraji and Mara, Abe no Omi, to inform
           the Empress, saying :-" The district of Katsuraki is my
XXII. 39. original residence, and I have therefore taken my name fronl
           it. I pray accordingly that I may have this district perma-
           nently, and I desire that it should be constituted nlY fief."
           Hereupon the Empress made an order, saying:-
              " We are sprung from the Saga family. Moreover the
           Oho-omi is Our uncle by the mother's side. Therefore the
           words of the Oho-omi, if spoken at night, (are carried into
           effect by us) before the night has given way to morning; if
           spoken in the daytime, (they are carried into effect) before the
           day has become dark. What speech of his have \'le not
           attended to? But if now in this Our reign, We were ra~hly
           to part \vith this district, future sovereigns \vould sa)', ',:\,
           foolish woman ruled the Empire, and rashly lost this district.'
           Not only should We be accounted unwise, but the Oho-omi
           would be thought disloyal. Such ,,,ould be Our ill-fame in
           ages to come." So she refused.
 A.D. 624.    32nd year, Spring, 1st month, 7th day. The King of Koryo
           sent tribute of a Buddhist priest, named Hye-kwan. He was
           appointed Soja.
 A.D. 626.    34th year, Spring, 1st month. Peach and plum trees
           blossomed.
              3rd month. It was cold, and hoar-frost fell.
              Summer, 5th month, 20th day. The Oho-ami died. He
           was buried in the tomb at Momohara. The Oho-omi was the
           son of Iname no Sukune. He had a talent for military tactics,
           and was also gifted with eloquence. He reverenced deeply the
           Three Precious Things. His house stood on the bank of the
           river Asuka. A small pond had been dug in the courtyard,
           and there was a little islalld in the middle of the pond.
           Therefore the men of that time called him Shima no Oha-
           omi. I
XXII. 40.     6th month. Sno\,y fell. This year from the 3rd to the 7th
                                1   The Island Premier.
                                    SUIKO.                                 155
month there \vere continual rains, and great famine in the
Empire. The old ate the roots of herbs, and died by the road-
side. Infants at the breast died with their mothers. Thieves
and robbers sprang up in great nUlnbers, and could not be put
down.
   jsth year, Spring, 2nd month. In the province of 1Iichi- A.D. 621.
noku there was a mujina 1 which changed into a man and
sang.
   Summer, 5th month. ~""'lies gathered together in great
numbers. They clustered together for ten rods, and floated
away in the air across the Shinano pass 2 \vith a sound like
thunder. They reached as far east as the province of Kami-
tsuke, and then spontaneously dispersed.
   36th year, Spring, 2nd month, 27th day. The Empress A.D. 628.
took to her sick bed.
   3rd month, 2nd day. There was a total eclipse of the sun.
   6th day. The Empress's illness became very grave, and XXII. 41.
(death) was unmistakably near. So she sent for the Imperial
 Prince Tamura, and addressed him, saying :-" To ascend to
the Celestial Dignity, and therewith to regulate the vast
foundation, to direct the manifold machinery of government,
and thereby to nourish the people-this is not a matter to be
lightly spoken of, but one which demands constant and serious
attention. Do thou therefore be careful and observant, and
let no hasty \vords escape thee."        On the same day she
 summoned to her Tamashiro no Ohoye, and instructed him,
saying :-" Thy heart is young. \Vhatever thou mayst wish
in thy bosom, do not utter it in speech, but be sure to await
the expression of general opinion, and act accordingly."
   7th day. The Empress died at the age of seventy..five.:i
She was temporarily interred in the Southern Court (of the
Palace).
   Summer, 4th month, 15th day. Hail fell, of the size of
peaches.
   16th day. Hail fell, of the size of plums. There was a
drought, which lasted from spring- till summer.
   Autumn, 9th month, 20th day. The rites of mourning for
the Empress began. At this time all the 1finisters each pro-
     1   A kind of badger.                     2 The present U sui Toge.
                        :i   The " Kojiki ii ends here.
          J26                          NIIIONGI.

           nounced a funeral eulogy at the shrine of the temporary burial-
           place.
              Before this time the Enlpress had given her dying injunc·
           tions to the Ministers, saying :-" Of late years the five grains
           have not produced well, and there is great famine among the
           people. Let there be therefore no costly interment 1 by raising
XXII. 42 • for me a misasagi, but let me be buried in the misasagi of the
           Imperial Prince Takeda.
              24th day. The Empress ,vas buried in the misasagi of
           Prince Takeda.

           1 Buddhist influence is traceable in the avoidance of costly forlns of

         burial. I t led subsequently to the abolition of misasagi.
                         BOOK XXIII.          .




                                                                 1
       THE EMPEROR OKINAGA TARASHI-HI HIRO-NUKA.


                       (JO.ilIEI~    TENNCi.)

THE Emperor Okinaga tarashi-hi hiro-nuka was the grandson
of the Emperor Nunakura futo-dama-shiki, 3 and the son of the
Imperial Prince Hikobito no Ohoye. His mother's name was
the Imperial Princess Nukade hime.
   In the 29th year of the reign of the Empress Toyo-mike
Kashikiya hime 4 the Prince Imperial Toyotomimi no Mikoto
died. No successor to him had been appointed. In the 3rd
month of the 36th year the Empress died. In the 9th month
the funeral ceremonies were completed, but no decision as to
who should succeed to the throne had yet been come to. At
this time Soga no Yemishi no Omi was Oho-omi. He wished to
decide the matter of the succession on his sale authority. But
apprehending that the ~1inisters generally would not acquiesce
in this, he consulted Abe no maro no Omi, and having
assembled all the Ministers, the~y entertained them in the
Oho-omi's house. When the feast was over, and they were
about to disperse, the Oho-omi through Abe no Omi addressed
the Ministers, saying :-" The Empress is dead, leaving no
successor. If measures are not taken promptly, civil disturbances
are to be feared. Which, therefore, of the Princes is to be her
successor? When the Empress took ill, she commanded the
Imperial Prince Tamura, saying :-' The Empire is a great
charge, and, of course, not to be lightly spoken of. Do thou

  1 Okinaga is the nalue of a place; tarashi-hi, suffice-sun, a honorific ;

hiro-nuke, broad forehead, is no doubt descripti\re of the Elnperor's
appearance.
  2 Extend-brightness.       3 Bidatsu Tenno.            " Suiko Tenn6.
  VOL. II.                                                      M
          J26                        NIHONGI.

          the Imperial Prince Tamura be ,vatchful and observant, and
          not remiss.' She next sent for Prince Yamashiro no Ohoye,
          and said to him :-' Do thou avoid brawling speech of thine
          o\vn, and fail not to follo\\" the words of the many'. Be self-
          restrained, and not .contentious.' These ,vere the dying
          injunctions of the Empress. ""hom now shall we make
           Emperor?" The Ministers \vere silent, and made no answer.
XXIII. 2. Again he asked them, but there ,\"as no repl~y. He persisted in
          questioning them, and thereupon Ohotomo no Kujira no
           Muraji advanced and said :-" Let us simply obey the
           Empress's d)"ing injunctions. There is no need to go beyond
          them, and consult general opinion:' Abe no Omi straightway
          inquired, sa)ring :-" "'hat does this mean? Explain th.r
          opinion." He ans,vered and said :-" \Vhat ,vas the Empress's
          intention when she gaye con1mand to the Imperial Prince
          Tamura, saying: 4 The Empire is a great charge; be not
          remiss J? Judging by this, the Imperial Dignity is alread)r
          decided. And ,,·ho shall gainsa)" this decision?" Then the
          four Ministers, Nlareshi, Cneme no Omi, Uma, Taka-muku no
          Omi, Mike, Nakatomi no Omi, and Musashi, Naniha no Kishi,.
          said :-" Let us comply ,\,ith the advice of Ohotomo no Muraji;
          there is no more objection to be made." Ohomaro, Kose no
          Omi, Adzumodo, Saheki no Muraji, and Shihote, Ki no Omi,
          these three, stood for,\"ard and said :-" It is Prince Yamashiro
          no Ohoye \\Tho should be made Emperor." But Soga no
          Kuramaro no Omi [also called ""omasa] alone said :-" I am
          unable to sa:r anything at this moment, but I ,viII think further
          over the matter and declare myself later." Upon this the
          Oho--omi, seeing that the l\1inisters ,vere inharmonious, and
          that the matter could not be accomplished, retired.
             Before this, the Oho-omi had bJ~ himself inquired of Saka-
          hibe no Marise no Omi, saying :-" The Empress has died,
          leaving no heir. Whom shall \ve make Emperor? '" He
          answered and said :-" Let us raise up Yamashiro no Oho~ye,
          and make him Emperor." At this tin1e Yamashiro no Oho)Ye
          was living in the Palace of Ikaruga. This consultation having
          come to his ears, he sent Prince ~1ikuni and \Vajiko, Sakura\vi
          no Omi, these tv/o, \vith a secret message to the Oho-ami,
XXIII. 3. sa)Ting :-" It has come to n1Y kno\vlege that (thou) my
          maternal uncle art desirous of tnaking the Imperial Prince
                                JO~IEI.                             159

Tamura Emperor. On hearing this report, I have thought of
it standing and have thought of it sitting, but without being
able to see on what just grounds it rests. I beg that I may be
clearly informed of my uncle's intentions." Hereupon the
Oho-omi, when he received this message from Yamashiro no
Ohoye, was unable of himself to give an answer. So he sent
for Abe no Omi, Nakatomi no Muraji, Ki no Omi, Kahabe no
Omi, Takamuku no Omi, Uneme no Omi, Ohotomo no Muraji,
and Kose no ami, to ,vhom he communicated fully Yamashiro
no Ohoye's message. He then proceeded to address these
Daibu, saying :-" Go, ye Daibu, in a body to the Palace of
Ikaruga, and sa~y to Prince Yamashiro no Ohoye, ' Ho,v should
his humble servant 1 be so rash as of his own authority to decide
the succession to the Dignity? All that he has done is to take
up the Empress's dying commands, and communicate them to
the Ministers.' The ~finisters said \vith one voice, ' In accord-
ance with the dying instructions of the Empress, the Imperial
Prince Tamura is the natural successor to the Dignity. Who
has any further objection?' Such were the words of the
Ministers. They are not specially my sentiments. Although I
have a private opinion of my own, out of respect I refrain from
communicatine it by message, and await the opportunity of an
intervie\v in order to inform thee personally." Hereupon the
Daibu, having received the \\?ords of the Oho-ami, proceeded
together to the Palace of Ikaruga, where Prince Mikuni and
Sakurawi no Omi were made to deliver to Yamashiro no Ohoye
the message of the Oho-omi. Now Prince Ohoye made them
go and ask the Daibu what were the dying commands of the
Empress. They answered and said :-" We do not know the
depth of the matter. Only we gathered from the account given
us of the circumstance by the Oho-omi that on the day in
which the Empress took to her sick bed, she gave command to
the Imperial Prince Tamura, and said to him, 'The future
government of the country is not to be lightly spoken of.
Therefore do ~hou the Imperial Prince Tamura speak of it with
self-restraint, and be not remiss.' She next gave command to
Prince Oho)Te, and said to him, 'Thy heart is young; avoid

  1 The interlinear Kana version has yakkora, Inaking the humble servant

plural, and to refer to the Daibu.
         160
         J26                            NIHOXGI.

          bra\vling words, and fail not to obey' the VOIce of general
          opinion.' The princesses in imlnediate attendance on the
XXIII. 4· Enlpress, and the ladies-in-\vaiting all kno\v this. ~loreover,
          it is ,yithin the direct kno,vledge of the great Prince." Here-
          upon Prince Ohoye caused further inquiry to be made, saying:
          -" Is there any special person ,vho has heard these dying
          injunctions of the Empress?" The answer "vas, We have no     H


          kno\Yledge of any secret particulars." After this he sent a
          fresh message to the Daibu, sa)1ing :-., My beloved maternal
          uncle has been at the pains to send me not simply a single
          messenger, but a number of high officials for m~y instruction.
          For this I am deeply grateful. It appears, ho\vever, that the
          dying commands of the Empress ,vhich the Ministers now tell
          me of are somewhat different from ,vhat I heard. As soon as I
          learnt that the Empress had taken to her sick bed, I hastened
          to the palace and waited at the gate. Then l'vlike, N akatomi
          no Muraji, came out fron1 the forbidden precinct, and said:-
          , I summon thee by command of the Empress.' Accordingly I
          proceeded to the inner gate. Moreover Kurome, I{urikuma no
          U neme, met me in the court:yard, and led me to the Great
          Hall. Now the Empress's personal attendants, \vith Princess
          I,-urimoto at their head, and eight ladies-in-\vaiting, Shibilne
          among the number, several tens of persons in all, were in attend-
          ance beside the Empress. The Imperial Prince Tamura was also
          present. N ow the Empress ,vas very ill, and could not see me.
          Accordingly Princess I(urimoto informed her that Prince Yama..
          shiro no Ohoye, whom she had sent for, had arrived. Then the
          Empress raised herself up and gave command, saying :_41 \Ve,
          ,vith onr poor abilities, have long borne the burden of the great
          institution. But no\vour destined career is drawing to a close;
          and this disease admits of no avoidance. Therefore, thou hast
          al,vays been dear to Our heart, and Our affection for thee has
          no parallel. Now the great foundation of the State is not a
XXIII. 5. thing of Our reign (alone), but from all time has demanded
          diligence. Do thou, though thy heart 1 is young, be ,vatchful
          over thy ,vords.' All those who \vere in immediate attendance
          on the Empress at that time kno\v this. Therefore when this
          great favour ,vas conferred on me, I ,vas on the one hand full
          of awe, and on the other full of grief. I leaped for jO)T, and
                         ) Lit. liver (kilno).   He ,vas thirty-six.
                                JO~l EI.                                161

knew not \vhat to do. Then I bethought nle :-' The Spirits of
the land and of grain and the ancestral shrines are ,","eight},
tnatters. I am young and devoid of vvisdom: ho,,' can I
presume to accept this charge?" Jlist at this time I desired to
converse \vith m}" maternal uncle and the l\1inisters on the
subject, but there ,vas no (fit) opportunit)O for me to speak, and
it is for this reason on1)0 that I ha\'e been silent up to the
IJresent. On a former occasion I ,vent to the capital in order
to pa)' a visit of inquir)O to In)" sick nlaternal uncle, and lodged
in the Temple of Toyora. On this day the Empress sent
Shibime, Yakuchi no Unen1e . to me \vith an Imperial message,
saying :-' Thy maternal uncle, the Oho-omi, constantl)!
expresses anxiety on thy account. After a hundred ,years,l is it
not to thee that the succession to the Dignitjr ,viII fall? Be.
therefore, watchful, and spare th,rself.' This matter is clear..
\Vhat doubt can there be about it ? But am I covetous of the
Empire? I am simpl)· declaring- \vhat I have heard, and I call
to \vitness to its truth the Gods both of Heaven and Earth.
Therefore it is m)' desire to ascertain accurately' the dyin~
commands of the Empress. ~toreover, ye, the )linisters sent
to me b)" the Oho-ami., are Inen \vho have al\\l'ays addressed the
sovereign as it· were holding t he sacred spear by the middle. ~
Will you be so good, therefore., as to inform my uncle? "
   After this Prince Hatsuse, the second son (of Prince Oho,ye 3) J
sent for Nakatomi no Muraji and Kahabe no Omi separatel)',
and said to them :-" Both my father and I spring from the
Saga famil)", as is well kno,vn to the ,,·orid. '\T e. therefore, reI)"
on it as on a high mountain. I pra)O, therefore, that the
succession to the Dignit)" be not lightl)O spoken of.'" So he sent
Prince Mikuni and Sakura,\"i no Omi alon~ ,\~ith the ~finisters,
saying- :-" I desire to recei\'e an ans\ver.'" Then the Oho-omi XXIII. 6.
sent Ki no Omi and Ohotomo no Muraji to sa)' to Prince
~Iikuni and Sakura\vi no Onli :~,. On a fornler occasion I said
all I had to say: there is nothing- else. Ho\\rever, ho\v should
I presume to despise one prince and honour another? ."
   Several days after, Prince Yamashiro no Oho)re again sent
Sakura\vi no Omi to the Oha-omi to say :-'. \Vhat I repre-
       i i.e. some day or another: after Illy death.
       ~ Without bias (?).
       J Prince Ohoye could, therefore, not have been \"ery youn;.:".
         J26                                NIHONGI.

          sented on the former day was only what I heard. Shall I
          oppose my maternal uncle? "
             On this day the Oho-omi was ill, and unable to hold a
          personal conversation with Sakurawi no Omi.
             The next day the Oho-omi sent for Sakurawi no Omi, and
          straightway despatched Abe no ami, Nakatomi no Muraji,
          Kahabe no Omi, Oharida no Omi, and Ohotomo no Muraji to
          address Prince Yamashiro no Ohoye, saying :-" From the,
          time of the Emperor 1 \vho reigned in the Palace of Shikishima
          until recently, the Ministers have all been wise men. No\v
          I am not wise, yet having happened on a time when men are
          scarce, I hold rank ,vrongfully above all the Ministers. This
          being so, I have been unable to settle the great foundation.~
          This is, however, a grave matter, and cannot well be discussed
          by intermediaries. Therefore, although my age makes it
          burdensome to me, I will speak with thee personally. This is
          merely that there may be no misunderstanding as to the
          Empress's dying injunctions, and not because I have any
          private views of my own."
             After this the Oho-omi sent Abe no Omi and Nakatomi no
          Muraji with a message to Sakahibe no Omi to inquire again of
          him, saying :-" Which Prince shall be made Emperor?" He
          answered and said :-" When the Oho-omi formerly asked me
          in person, his slave said all that he had to sayan the matter.
          What need is there now for any further message?" And he was
          greatly enraged, and got up and went out. Just at this time
          there was a gathering of all the kinsmen of the Saga House to
          construct a tumulus for Shima no aha-ami. They lodgt.'d at
          the place where the tomb was. Hereupon Marise no Omi,~
          having pulled down the sheds at the tomb, retired to the Saga
          farm-house, and would do no official duty. Upon this, the
          Oho-omi was angry, and sent Katsushi, Musa no Kimi, and
XXIII. 7. Akawi, Nishikori no Obito, to admonish him, saying :-" I
          know thy evil speeches, but by reason of our relationship of
          elder and younger brother I cannot injure thee. But if others
          are wrong and thou art right, I shall oppose them and follow
          thee: if others are right and thou art wrong, I shall in that

          1   Kimn1ei Tenno.                  2 That is, the succession to the throne.
                               3   The saine as Sakahibe no OOli.
                             JO~IEI.                            J26

case oppose thee and follo\v them. If, therefore, thou shonldst
eventually disagree with me, there will be a breacl1 between us,
and there will, moreover, be civil broils in the laud. ~rhen
posterity "viII say that thou and I have brought the country to
ruin. Such would be our ill-fame with after generations. Do
thou be watchful} nor allow a rebellious spirit to arise.~'
   But he still refused compliance, and at length went to
Ikaruga, where he dwelt in the Palace of Prince Hatstlse.
Hereupon the Oho-omi became more and more wrathful, and
sent the Ministers to make a request of Yamashiro no Ohoye,
saying :-" Marise has of late been disobedient to ll1e, and has
concealed himself in the Palace of Prince Hatsllse. I pray
thee, let me have Ivlarise, so that I may exalnine the reasons."
Hereupon, Prince Ohoye ans"rered and said: -" ~Iarise was
always a favourite of the wise Empress, and has only come
here for a short visit. How should he set himself in opposition
to the sentiments of my maternal uncle? I pray thee, do not
find fault with him." Accordingly he spoke to ~Iarise, saying:
- " It is most kind of thee to come, not forgetting the gratitude
 which thou owest to the former prince. l But the peace of the
 Empire is now threatened on thy sole account. ~1oreover, the
 former Prince, when near his end, addressed his children,
 saying :-' Avoid wickedness of every kind, practise good of
 every kind.' I heard this speech, and have made it my con-
 stant rule of life. On this account, although I have 111)- private
 sentiments, I am patient, and not wrathful. N or can I set
 myself in opposition to my uncle. I pray thee, henceforward,
 be not afraid to reform thy views. Yield to the nlan~y, and do
 not withdraw thyself." ~
    At this time, the Daibu also admonished Marise no Omi,
 saying :-" Thou shouldst not disobey the commands of Prince
 Ohoye." Hereupon Marise no Omi, having advanced to a
 point where he had nowhere to turn for support, burst out
 weeping and went home again. He remained in his house XXIII. 8.
 for more than ten days. Prince Hatsllse suddenly took ill and
 died. Hereupon Marise no Omi said :-" Though I live, on
 whom shall I place my trust? "

  1 The Japanese COlnmentators explain this expression as referring to
Shotoku Daishi, Prince Ohoye's father.
  2 From duty as a public servant.
            J26                            NIHONGI.

              The Oho..omi, wishing to put to death Sakahibe no Omi                   4



            raised troops \vhich he sent against him. Sakahibe no Omi
            hearing that an armed force was coming, took with him his
            second son, Aya, and going outside the gate, sat down on a
            chair and \vaited. Then the troops arrived, and Ikuhi, Kume
            no Mononobe, was made to strangle him. Father and son
            died together and were buried in the same place. But the
            eldest son, Ketsu, fled and concealed himself in the tiled house I
            of a nunnery, \vhere he had intrigues with one or two of the
            nuns. Now one of the nuns was jealous and informed on him.
            The temple was surrounded and he was on the point of being
            caught, when he got away and went to Mount Unebi. There..
            fore they searched the mountain. Ketsu had no place to
            escape to, and committed suicide on the mountain by stabbing
            himself in the throat. The people of that day made a song,
            sayIng :--
                                 On Mount Unebi
                                   Though thin are the trees,
                                 Ma y there not be trust in thenl ?
                                   1'he youth Ketsu
                                 Seen1S to have hidden there. 2

A.D. 629-    1st year, Spring, 1st month, 4t11 day. The Oho-ami together
           with the ~Iinisters took the Imperial Seal and offered it to the
           Imperial Prince Tamura. He declined it, saying :-" The
           ancestral shrines are a weight), matter. I, the inept one, am
           wanting in wisdom; how can I presume to undertake their
           charge?" The l\1inisters humbly persisted in their request,
           saying :-" Thou, great Prince, ,vert the favourite of the late
           sovereign. Both the spirit realm and this visible world incline
           their hearts to thee. It is right that thou shouldst continue the
           Imperial line, and dispense thy radiance down on the people."
              On the same day, he assumed the Imperial Dignity.
XXIII. 9.     Summer, 4th month, 1St day. Tanabe no Muraji was sent
           to Yaku. 3
             This year was the year Tsuchinoto Ushi (26th) of the Cycle.
 A.D. 630.    2nd year, Spring, 1st month, 12th day. The Imperial
              1 The" Tsusho" says that at this period the only part of a telnple \vhich

            had a tiled roof was the Hall of \\1o rs hip.
              '2 A Regular Tanka of thirty-one syllables.

              a See above, XXII. 28.
                                JO~1EI.                               J26

Princess Takara was appointed Empress-consort. She had
two sons and one daughter. The name of the eldest ,vas the
Irrlperial Prince Katsuraki [the Emperor who reigned in the
Palace of Ohotsll in Afumi]; 1 the second ,vas called the
Imperial Princess Hashibito; 1 the third "vas called the Im-
perial Prince Oho-ama [the Emperor \vho reigned in the
Palace of KiyomiharaJ .:i The Lady Hode no Iratsume, daughter
of the Oho-omi Saga no Shima, bore (to him) the Imperial
Prince Furubito [also called the Imperial Prince Ohoye].
I-Ie also took to him Kaya 4 no Uneme, of the province of
I~ibi, who bore to him the Imperial Prince J<aya.
   Jrd month, 1st day. The senior ambassador from I{ory(j
named Yon Cha-phe, and the junior ambassador Ya-tok, \vith
the senior ambassador from Pekche, the Eun-sol, Soch,l, and
the junior ambassador the Tok-sol, M utok, offered tribute
together.
   Autumn, 8th month, 5th day. The Dainin, Mitasuki,
lnug-ami no Kimi, and the Dainin Kusushi 6 no Ejitsu were sent
to Great Thang. 6
   8th day. The Koryo and Pekche guests \vere entertained
at Court.
   9th month, 4th day. The Koryo and Pekchc guests returned
to their own country.
   In this month Tanabe no Muraji and his companions
returned from Yaku.
   Winter. loth month, 12th day. The Emperor removed (the
palace) to a place near the Hill of Asuka. This ,vas called
the Palace of Okamoto. 7 In this year the official residences
of the three Han 8 in Oho-kohori at N aniha were repaired.
   3rd year, Spring, 2nd month, loth day. People from Yaku A.D. 631.
emigrated hither.
   3rd month, 1St day. Wi-cha,9 King of Pekche, sent Prince XXIII.lc.
Phung-chyang as hostage.
  1 Tenchi Tenno.        ~ Wife of Kotoku Tenno.      3 Viz. l'emn1u Tenno.

  4 Kaya is the name of a place. The U nerne generally \vere called by the
names of the places they came fro01.
  i Physician.

  6 This Enlbassy is Inentioned in the Thang annals.

  7 i.e. "bottom of hill."  In Yamato.           8 Silla, Koryo and pekche.

  9 Wi-cha, according to the" Tongkam," came to the throne in A.D. 641.

So there is sOlnething wrong here.
          166
          J26                           N IIIONGI.
                Autulnn, 9th month, 19th day. The Emperor made a pro-
             gress to the hot springs of Arima 1 in the Province of Settsu.
                Winter, 12th month, 13th day. The Emperor arrived from
             the hot springs.
 A.D. 63 2 •    4th year, Autumn, 8th month. Great Thang sent Kao
              Piao-jen to escort Mitasuki (on his way back from China to
             Japan). They anchored together at Tsushima. At this
             time the student-priests Ryong-un and Bin, together with
             Suguri no Torikahi and Silla Escort Envoys, came in their
             train.
                Winter, loth month, 4th day. The Envoys from the Land
             of Thang, !(ao Piao-jen and his companions, arrived in the
             harbour of Naniha. Accordingly Mumakahi no Muraji was
             sent to meet them at E-guchi. 2 There were thirty-two boats,
             which, as well as the drums, fifes and flags, were all gaily
             decorated. He addressed Kao Piao-jen and his companions,
             saying :-" Hearing that the Envoy appointed by the Son of
             Heaven has arrived at the Emperor's Court, I have come to
             receive l1im." Then Kao Piao-jen answered and said :-" On a
             day when the wind is so chill, it gives me great pleasure that
             you have been good enough to come to meet me with these
             gaily-decked boats." Hereupon Wotsuki, Naniha no Kishi,
             and Yafushi, Ohoshi-kahachi no Atahe, were appointed to be
XXIII. I I. their guides as far as the front of the official residence. Then
             Itto, Iki no Fubito, and Yatsushi, Naniha no Kishi, ~·ere sent to
             introduce the guests into the official residence. On the same
             day, sacred sake S was given them.
 A.D. 633.      5th year, Spring, 1St morlth, 26th day. The Envoys from
             Great Thang, Kao Piao-jen and his companions, returned to
             their own country. The envoys sent to escort them, viz. the
             Kishi Womaro, Kuromaro and the rest, went as far as Tsushima,
             and then caUle back.
 A.D. 634.      6th year, Autumn, 8th month. A long star was seen in the
             south. The people of that time called it a besom-star. 4

           1  Well known to residents at the Treaty Port of Kobe.
           2  River-n1outh.
            3 This sake was made under special arrangements (rom rice grown in

         certain Temple glebe-lands. Vide" Yengishiki." It was customary to offer it
         to foreign ambassadors.
           4 Hahaki-boshi or hoki-boshi, the present name for a comet.
                                 JOMEI.                               J26

    7th year, Spring, 1st month. The besom-star ,vent round A.D. 635.
 and was seen in the East.
    Summer, 6th month, loth day. Pekche sent the Tal-sol,
 Yu and others with tribute.
    Autumn, 7th month, 7th da)r. The Pekche guests were
 entertained at Court. In this month a lotus of auspicious
 omen gre\v in the Tsurugi pond. There \vere two flowers on
 one stalk.
   8th year, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. There ,vas an A.D. 63 6 .
    ·
 ec1ipse  f h
         0 t e sun.
                                                                 XXIII.I2.

   3rd month. All those who had had illicit intercourse with
the U neme ,,,ere put on their trial, and were all punished.!
   At this time W osazaki, !\fi,va no Kimi, by reason of the
pain of the examination,2 committed suicide by stabbing himself
in the throat.
   Summer, 5th month. There were great rains and floods.
   6th month. The Palace of Okamoto having been destroyed
by fire, the Emperor removed his residence to the Palace of
Tanaka.
   Autumn, 7th month, 1st day. Prince Ohomata addressed
Toyora no Oho-omi, saying :-" The Ministers and function-
aries are remiss in their attendance at Court. Henceforward,
let them attend at the beginning of the hour of the Hare,a and
,vithdraw after the hour of the Serpent;' Regulate this by
means of a bell." The Oho-omi, however, did not take this
advice.
   This year there was a great drought, and there was famine
throughout the Empire.
   9th year, Spring, 2nd month, 23rd day. A great star floated A.D 637.
from East to West, and there was a noise like that of thunder.
The people of that day said that it was the sound of the falling
star. Others said that it was earth-thunder. Hereupon the
Buddhist Priest Bin said :-" It is not the falling star, but the
Celestial Dog,' the sound of whose barking is like thunder."

  1 No doubt capital punishment is 111eant.                   ~ By torture.
  :15 to 7 a m. To be more exact, the beginning of this hour is an hour
before daybreak.
  ~ 9 to I I a ffi. Such early hours are usual in Eastern Courts. The King
of Corea at the present day receives his Ministers before daybreak.
  a "The Classic of the Mountains and Seas" (a very ancient Chinese book)
            168
            J26                             N IIIONGI.
XXIII.13·       3rd month, 2nd day. There was an eclipse of the sun.
                In this year the Yemishi rebelled and did Ilot come to Court.
            The Dainin, Katana, Kamitsukenu no Kimi, was appointed
            general to smite them. But it was he, on the contrary, who
            was defeated by the Yemishi, and fled into a fortress, where he
            was eventually besieged by the enemy. His soldiers all slipped
            away, and the castle became empty. The general was per..
            plexed and knew not \vhat to do. Then at nightfall he was
            climbing over the palisade in order to escape, when his \vife
            lamented, saying :-" Oh, what a shame that we should be slain
            by Yemishi !" And to her husband she spoke, saying :-" Th)'
            ancestors crossed the blue ocean and travelled 10,000 ri to
            reduce to submission Governments beyond the water, and so
            hand do\vn to future generations their dread valour. If thou
            dost now bring disgrace on the nan1e of thy forefathers, thou
            ,v.iIt surely become a laughing.. stock to posterity." So she
            poured out sake for her husband, and compelled him to drink
            it. Then she girded on herself her husband's sword, and bend-
            ing ten bows, caused the women, of whom there were several
            tens, to twang the bow-strings. \Vhen this was done, her
            husband roused himself again, and seizing a weapon which was
            lying on the ground, advanced. The Yemishi thought that the
            army was still numerous, and by degrees withdrew. Hereupon
            the routed troops reassembled, and, re-forming their ranks,
            attacked the Yemishi, whom they greatly defeated, taking them
            everyone prIsoners.
 A.D. 638 .     loth year, Autumn, 7th month, 19th day. There was a great
            storm, which broke trees and tore up houses.
                9th n10nth. There were continuous rains, and peaches and
            plunls blossomed.

            says: "At the Heaven-gate-mountain there is a red dog, called the Celestial
            Dog. Its lustre flies through Heaven, and as it floats along becomes a
            star of several tens of rods (10 feet) in length. It is swift as the \vind. Its
            voice is like thunder, and its radiance like lightning."
               The Celestial Dog   X      fij is a group of seven stars near the zodiacal
            constellation .I. (Cancer). Giles says that it is in Argo. The interlinear
            Kana has Ama no Kitsune, or the Celestial Fox.
               The Celestial Dog, or Tengu, of modern Japanese superstition is a winged
            creature in hUlnan fOrIn \vith an exceedin~ly long nose, \vhich haunts moun·
            tain-tops and other secluded places. I t is a favourite subject of artists. See
            " Anderson's British ;,,1 uselllll Catalogue," p. 410.
                                  JO~lEI.                            16 9

   Winter, loth month. There was an Imperial progress to the XXIII.14·
 Palace of the hot springs of Arima.
   This year Pekche, Silla, and Imna all sent tribute.
   11th year, Spring, 1St month, 8th day. The Imperial carriage A.D. 639·
returned from the hot springs.
   11th day. The festival of tasting the new rice 1 was held.
   12th day. There ,vas thunder without any clouds. 2
   22nd day. There was a storm with thunder.
   26th day. A long star appeared in the north-west. Priest
Bin said that it \vas a besom-star. When it appeared, there
was famine. 3
   Autumn, 7th month. The Emperor made a decree, saying:
-" This year let there be a great palace and a great temple
built." So the bank of the Kudara 4 River was chosen as the
site for the palace. Herewith the western population built the
palace, and the eastern population 5 built the temple. .~gata,
Fumi no Atahe, was made architect.
   Autumn, 9th month. The priests who had studied in Great XXIII. IS.
Thang, viz. Ye-on and Ye-un, entered the capital in the train of
the Silla Escort Envoys.
   Winter, 11th month, 1st day. The Silla Envoys were enter-
tained at Court. Accordingly the Emperor granted them one
grade of cap-rank.
   12th month, 14th day. There was an Imperial progress to
the Palace of the hot springs of Iyo.
   In this month a pagoda of nine stories was erected on the
bank of the River Kudara.
   12th year, Spring, 2nd month, 7th day. A star entered the A.D. 640.
moon. 6
   Summer, 4th month, 16th day. The Emperor returned from
Iyo, and took up his residence in the Palace of Miimaya-zaka.
   5th month, 5th day. A great Buddhist maigre entertainment

  1   N ihi-nanle.
  2   An evil omen, according to the Chinese and ROlnans.
  3 Bin   is the Priest quoted above, XXIII. 12, as an authority on
astronomical matters.
  4 'The Japanese name for pekche.
  i The west is no doubt Kahachi, the east Yamato.

  6 Chinese history records that Venus entering the Inoon was looked upon

by the diviners as portending mortality among the people.
         J26
         17°                           NIHONGI.

           ,vas given, at which by request the priest Ye-on expounded the
           Muryo jiu ki6. 1
              Winter, loth month, 1 Ith da~y. Sh6.an, a priest who had
           studied in Great Thang, and the student Kuromasa Takamuku
                                                                  t

           no Ayabito arrived by way of Silla. The tribute-bearing Envoys
XXIIT.16. of Pekche and Silla came in their compan)T. Each of them ~
           was granted a grade of cap-rank.
              This month (the Emperor) removed to the Palace of Kudara.
 A.D. 641.    13th year, \\Tinter, loth month, 9th day. The Emperor died
           in the Palace of Kudara.
              18th day. He \vas temporarily interred north of the Palace.
           This ,~{as called the" great temporary tomb" of Kudara. At
           this time the Heir Apparent, the Imperial Prince Hirakasu
           wake, ,vas sixteen )?ears old, and pronounced the funeral
           eulogium.

           1 Florenz, quoting" Bunyu Nanjio," says this is the Anlitayu Sutra or

         Sukha\"ati \' y ftha ; Mury6 jiu 111eanS " Everlasting life."
           2 i.e. of the Envoys.
                           BOOK XXIV.

                                                                           i
THE EMPRESS AME TOYO.. TAKARA IKASHI .. HI TARASHI HIME.



                     (KOG YOKU2           TENNO.)

THE Empress Arne toyo--takara    ikashi-hi tarashi hime was the
great-granddaughter of the Emperor Nuna-kura futo-dama-
shiki,3 granddaughter of the Imperial Prince Ohoye,Oshizaka
no hiko-bito, and daughter of Prince Chinu. Her mother's
name was Princess Kibi.
   This Empress conducted the government in conformity with
the ancient path.
   In the second year of the Emperor Okinaga tarashi-hi hiro-
nuka,4 she ,vas appointed Empress-consort. This Emperor
died in the 10th month of the 13th year of his reign.
   1st ~year, Spring, 1st month, 15th day. The Ernpress-con- A.D. 64 2 •
sort assumed the Imperial Dignity. Yemishi, Soga no Omi,
was made Dho-omi as before. The Oho--omi's son, Iruka [also
called KuratsukuriJ, took into his o\\rn hands the reins of
government, and his po\ver ,vas greater than his father's.
Therefore thieves and robbers ,vere in dread of him, and things
dropped on the highwa)ts ,vere not picked up.
   29th day. The Dainin, Hirafu, Adzumi no Muraji, who had
gone as Envo)r to Pekche, returned from Tsukushi, riding on
post-horses, and said :-" The Land of Pekche, hearing of the
 Emperor's death, has sent Ambassadors of condolence, along
with whom I arrived in Tsukushi. But I wished to take part

  1  Heaven-rich-treasure-great-sun-suffice-princess.
  ~ This \vord occurs in the" Shooking," p. 328   of Legge's edition, where it
is translated " royal perfection."
   3 Bidatsu Tenno.                          • ]oluei Tenno.
                                       NIHONGI.

         in the funeral ceremonies, and therefore have come on alone
         in advance. That country, however, is at present greatly
         disturbed. "
XXIV. 2.    2nd month, 2nd day. Hirafu, Adzumi no Yamashiro no
         Muraji, Ihakane, Kusakabe no Kishi, and Agata, Yamato no
         Aya no fumi no Atahe, were sent to the Pekche Ambassadors of
         condolence to inquire their news. The Ambassadors of con~
         dolence replied, saying :-" The sovereign of Pekche said to
          us :-' Se-syang is always behaving badly. I request that he
         may be delivered to the Envoys on their return.''' The Empress
         did not consent.
            The servants of the Pekche Envoys of condolence said:-
          "In the IIth month of last year, the Te-sa-phyong,t Chi-
          chyok, died. Moreover the Pekche Envoys flung the Kunluen ~
          Envoys into the sea. In the first month of this year the King's
          mother died. Again, Kyoki, the son of the younger Prince,
          and also his younger sisters by the same mother, four persons
          in all, with the Lord N e-sa· phycmg/l and over forty notables,
          were banished to an island." ~
             6th day. Koryb Envoys anchored in the harbour of Naniha.
             21St day.   Th~ Daibu were sent to the district (government
          house) of N aniha to inspect the gold and silver sent as tribute
XXIV. 3. by the Land of Koryo, as well as the other things presented by
          that country. After the Envoys had delivered over all the
          tribute, they said :-" The younger Prince died in the sixth
          month of last year. In the autumn, the 9th month, the Prime
           Minister, Irikasyumi, slew the King, and also put to death
          Iriko-Iyesa and others to the number of more than 180. Then
          he took the son of the younger Prince and made him King: He
          also made his own relation 6 To-syu-ryu Keum-nyu Prime
           Minister."
             22nd day. The Koryb and Pekche guests were entertained
           1* 1X. zp., 1tit.
           2  Kun-Iuen. ~l
                            Prime Minister.
                                  may be the Kunluen mountains between the desert
         of Gobi and Tibet, or it may be Pulo Condore in the China Sea.
            3 rq 1X. ZJ!, a Corean officer, Japanese N aidaijin, says a commentator.
            4 This is servants' gossip-not to be taken without many grains of salt.

         Chi-chyCik is alive later on, and Kyoki appears as chief envoy to Japan. See
         below, XXIV. 4.
           .; The" Tongkam " places these events in A.D. 642, loth month.
            6 Lit. of the same surname.
                              KOGV·OKU.                               173
at the Naniha district (Government office). The Empress
commanded the Oho-omi to send Oho-ama, Tsumori no
Muraji, as Envoy' to KOr}TO, Kuhina, Naniha no Kishi, to Pekche,
Mato, Kusakabe no Kishi, to Silla, and Nae-aye, Sakamoto no
l(ishi, to Imna.
   24th day. KY'oki ,vas sent for and lodged in the house of
Adzumi no Yamashiro no Muraji.
   25th day. The Koryo and Pekche guests were entertained.
   27th day. The Koryo and Pekche Envoys both took their
departure.
   3rd month, 3rd day. There ,vas rain without any clouds.
   Silla sent Envoys of congratulation on the accession, and
also Envoys of condolence.
   15th day. The Silla Envo)-s took their departure. This
month there ,vere continual rains.
   Summer, 4th month, 8th da}r. The Chief Envoy Kyoki and
his companions had an audience of the Empress.
   loth day. The Oho-omi, Soga, inyited K}TOki of Pekche and
his companions to his house at U nebi. He had friendly con- XXI,r. 4
versation with them and presented a good 1 horse and t\venty'
bars of iron. But he did not invite Se-syang.
   This month there were continuous rains.
   sth month, sth day. Kyoki and his companions were
invited to witness an archerY'-hunt : in front of the Miyake of
Yosami in the province of Kahachi .
   16th day. The ship of the Envoys of the Land of Pekche
and the ship of the Kishi anchored together in the harbour of
Naniha.
   18th day. The Pekche Envoys delivered their tribute, and
the Kishi reported their mission.
   21St day.   One of I<:yoki's companions died.
   22nd day. A child of K:roki died. At this time, Kyoki and
 his wife shrunk with horror from the dead child, and were not
present at the funeral ceremonies. It is the general custom in
 Pekch6 and Silla when a death occurs that even the parents,
 brothers, husband or wife, and sisters of the deceased should
never look on him again. Judging from this, they are utterl)r
  J i.e. well-broken.
  2 The interlinear Kana has uma-Yltlui, i.e. shooting with bo\v and arrows
from horseback.
  VOL. II.                                                       N
        J26                                NIHONGI.

         wanting in feeling, and not to be distinguished from birds and
         beasts.
            23rd day. Ripe rice was seen.
            24th day. Kyoki removed with his wife and children to the
         house in Ohowi in Kudara, and sent people to bury his child In
         Ishikaha. 1
            6th month, 16th day. Fine rain fell.
            6th month. There was a great drought.
            Autumn, 7th month, 9th day. A guest-star entered the moon. 2
            22nd day. The Pekch6 Envoys, the Te-sa-phyong, Chi-
         chyok, and his colleagues were entertained at Court.
                 One writing has :-" The Te-sa-phyong, Chichyok, and
              his son the Tal-sol-the name is wanting-the Eun-sol
              Kun-syon."
         Therewith stout fellows were commanded to wrestle before
         Kyoki, Chichyok and the others. \Vhen the banquet was over,
         they retired and went to pay their respects at Kyoki's gate.
XXIV. 5.    23rd day. The pages of Iruka, Soga no Omi, caught a white
         sparrow. 3 On the same day at the same time there was a man
         who put a white sparrow (or sparro\vs) into a cage and sent it
         as a present to Saga no Omi.
            25th day. The Ministers conversed with one another, say-
         ing :-" In accordance with the teachings of the village hafuri,
         there have been in some places horses and cattle killed as a
         sacrifice to the Gods of the various (Shinto) shrines, in others
         frequent changes of the market-places,4 or prayers to the River-
          1   Narne of a district in Kahachi.
          ~ This is evidently what lye call the" occultation " of a star.
           S A lucky olnen•

           .. This is an old CllSt0111 in China. A Chinese book, J( ~+I ~e, says that in a
        certain village there is a pond. At this pond there is a stone cow.. In years
        of drought, the peasants kill a cow and, mixing its blood with mud, smear it
        on the back of the stone co,v, ,vith prayers.
           The" Kogojiui," an ancient Japanese book, speaks of sacrifices of oxen
        to the Ohotsuchi (great-earth) nushi (lnaster) no Kanli. The flesh was eaten
        by the peasants.
           The practice of changing the market-place as a means of averting drought
        is also an old Chinese custom. The present custom of closing the city gates
        of Soul, the capital of Corea, to put a stop to excessive rain, may be com..
        pared with it.
          A luodern conlnlentator denounces both these customs (sacrifice of animals
        and changing the Inarket..place) as contrary to the spirit of Shintoism.
                              KOGYOKU.                                175
Gods. None of these practices have had hitherto any good
result." Then Saga no Oho-ami answered and said :-" The
, Mahayana Sutra ' ought to be read by way of extract 1 in the
temples, our sins repented of, as Buddha teaches, and thus
with humility rain should be prayed for."
   27th day. In the South Court of the Great Temple, the
images of Buddha and of the Bosatsu,2 and the images of the
four Heavenly Kings, were magnificently adorned. A multitude
of priests, by humble request, read the "Mahayana Sutra."
On this occasion Soga no Oho-omi held a censer in his hands,
and having burnt incense in it, put up a prayer.
   28th day. A slight rain fell.
   29th day. The prayers for rain being unsuccessful, the
reading of the " Sutra " was discontinued.
    8th month, 1st day. The Emperor made a progress to the
 river-source of Minabuchi. Here he knelt down and prayed,
 worshipping towards the four quarters, and looking up to
 Heaven. a Straightway there was thunder and a great rain, which
 eventually fell for five days, and plentifully bedewed the Empire.
  [One writing has :-" For five days there was continuous rain,
 and the nine grains rIpened."]
    Hereupon the peasantry throughout the Empire cried with one XXI V. 6.
 voice, " Bansai," and said, " An Emperor of exceeding virtue! "
    6th day. The Pekche Envoys, viz. the Associate Official and
 the rest, took their departure. They were given a large ship
 and three boats.
    This day at midnight it thundered in the south-west corner,
 and there was ,vind and rain. The ship in which the Associate
 Official and his companions were embarked ran ashore and was
 wrecked.

   1 The tendoku  (M    it) is the reading of passages of a book to repre-
sent the whole. I have seen a dozen priests each with a pile of books on his
right, of which he took one, read a few words at the beginning, lllade the
pages defile rapidly before him, and then reading a few words at the end,
passed it to a gradually increasing pile on his left. In this way a volume
takes only a few seconds to dispose o~ and although the Buddhist scriptures
are pretty voluminous, an hour or two of this sort of thing makes son1C
ilnpression on them.
   2 Boddhisaty,'a.

   I This is the Chinese as opposed to the Buddhist style, which had been
without result.
Ij6
J26                                NIHONGI.

   13th day. The rank of Shotoko was conferred on the
Pekche hostage, the Tal-sol, Chyan~-pok. One grade of rank
was conferred on the guests of middle and lower condition, and
they each received presents according to their station.
   15th day. A ship was given to the Associate Official of
Pekche and his conlpanions, in which they were sent off.
   16th day. The Koryo Envoys returned to their country.
   26th day. The Pekche Envoys returned to their country.
   9th month, 3rd day. The Empress commanded the Oho-
omi, saying :-" It is our wish to build a great temple. Let
labourers be levied from Afumi and Koshi." Moreover, charge
was given to the various provinces to have ships built.
   19th day. The Empress commanded the Oho-omi, saying:
- " I wish the building of a palace to be begun in this month,
and completed not later than the I2th month. Let building-
timber be taken from the various provinces. Accordingly,
workmen for building the palace ,vere levied from Totomi on
the east, as far as Aki on the west.
   21st day. The Yemishi of the Koshi neighbourhood, several
thousand in number, made their submission.
   Winter, loth month, 8th day'. There ,vas an earthquake,
with rain.
   9th day. There was an earthquake. This night there was
an earthquake, with wind.
   12th day. The Yemishi were entertained at Court.
   15th day. Soga no Oho-ami entertained the Yemishi in
his house, and personally made kind inquiries after their
welfare.
   On this day, the ship of the Silla Envoys of condolence, and
the ship of the Envoys of congratulation on the accession,
anchored at the island of Iki.
   24th day. There was an earthquake at midnight.
  This month summer ordinances were put in force. l There
was rain without clouds.
   1 The \vriter had probably in his nlind a passage of the" Liki" (Legge's

translation, Vol. I. p. 276), of which the follo\ving is an extract :--" If in the
second ll10nth of summer the governmental proceeding's of \vinter were
observed, hail and cold would injure the grain; the roads would not be
passable, and violent assaults of war \vould conle." The general purport is
that bad government is the cause of bad weather, pestilence and other
disasters. I am not sure, however. that the Japanese \vriter adopts this
                            K6GY01~U.                           177
   11th month, 2nd day. There was great rain, with thunder. XXIV·7.
   5th day. At midnight there \vas a thunder-clap in the north-
west corner.
  8th day. It thundered five times in the north-west corner.
   9th day. The weather was warm, as in spring.
   roth day. Rain fell.
   11th day. The weather ,vas \varm, as in spring.
   13th day. There was a thunder-clap in the northern quarter,
and wind sprang up.
   r6th day. The Empress celebrated the festival of tasting
the new rice. On this day the Prince Imperial and the Oha-
omi each personally tasted the new rice. 1
   12th month, 1st day. The weather was mild, as in spring.
  3rd day. It thundered five times during the day, and twice
at night.
   9th day. It thundered t\vice in the east, and there ,vas wind
and rain.
   13th day. The mourning ceremonies for the Emperor
Okinaga tarashi-hi hiro-nuka were begun. On this day, the
Shotoko, Tokudai, Rose no Omi, pronounced a funeral
eulogium on behalf of Prince Ohomata. Next the Shotoko
Hosome, Ahata no Omi, pronounced a funeral eulogium on
behalf of the Imperial Prince Karu. Next the Shiitoko, Miima-
kahi, Ohotomo no Muraji, pronounced a funeral eulogiurrl on
behalf of the Oho-omi.
   14th day. Okinaga no Yamana no Kimi pronounced an
eulogium of the Imperial line.
   20th day.    It thundered three times in the north-east
corner.
   21st day. The Emperor Okinaga tarashi-hi hiro-nuka was
buried on the Hill of Name-hazama.
   On this day the Empress removed her residence to the XXIV. 8.
Palace of W oharida.
        One writing says :-" To the temporary palace in the
     southern courtyard of the Eastern Palace."
   23rd day. It thundered once in the nig~t with a splitting
nOIse.

theory. He may only mean that the \veather was unseasonable, \vithout
intending to saddle the Empress with the responsibility for it.
  1 They probably celebrated this ceremony in their own houses.
        J26                            NIHONGI.

          30th day. The weather was mild, as in spring.
          This year Yemishi, Soga no Oho-omi erected his own
        ancestral temple at Taka-miya in Katsuraki, and performed an
        eight-row d~nce! Finally he made a song, saying :-

                               In order to ford
                               The River Hiro-se of Oshi
                               In Yamato,
                               I adjust my garters
                               And gird up my loins! 2


          Moreover he levied all the people of the land as well as the
        serfs of the 180 Be, and constructed two tombs at Imaki in
        preparation for his death. 3 One was called the Great Misasagi,
        and was intended as the tomb of the Oho-omi; one was
        called the Small Misasagi, and was meant for the tomb of
        Iruka no Omi. It was his desire that after his death other
        people might not be troubled. Moreover he assembled all the
        Mibu people of Kamutsumiya,4 and made them do forced
        labour on the precincts of the tombs. Hereupon Princess
        Kamutsumiya no Oho-iratsume' was wroth, and exclaimed,
         saying :-" Soga no Omi wantonly usurps the Government of
         the land, and does many outrageous things. In Heaven there
XXIV. 9. are not t"TO suns: in a state there cannot be two sovereigns.
         Why should he, at his own pleasure, employ, in forced labour,
         all the people of the fief?" From this her hate began to
         gather, and she at length shared in the common downfal1. 6
            This year was the year Midzunoye Tora (39th) of the Cycle.
A.D. 643    2nd year, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. In the morning great
         clouds of five colours 7 covered all the sky, ex'cept in the
         north-east, where they were wanting. A mist of a uniform
         blue colour arose from the earth on all sides.

          1 These \vere assumptions of Imperial rank.       Vide" Legge's Chinese
        Classics," Vol. I. p. 18.
          2 Hiro-se means a broad ford.       Apparently Soga, in these lines, is
        supposed to hint at his secret ambition of usurpation.
          SIt was not unusual to build sepulchral mounds during the lifetime of the
        intended occupant. Nintoku Tenno is an example.
          4 The serfs of the late Prince Shotoku Daishi.

          5 Shotoku Daishi's daughter.                 6 See below, XXIV. 13.
          '; Rainbo\v-tinted.
                           KOGYOKU.                             179
    loth day. A great storm.
    2nd month, 20th day. Peach-blossoms first appeared.
    25 th day. The leaves and flovvers of herbs and trees were
inj ured by hail.
    In this month there were wind, thunder, and ice-rain.
Winter ordinances were in force.
    3rd month, 13th day. The official quarters of the Pekche
guests at Naniha and the houses of the people took fire.
    25th day. The flowers and leaves of the herbs and trees
,,,,ere injured by frost.
    In this month there were wind, thunder, rain and ice-rain.
'Vinter ordinances were in force.
    Summer, 4th month, 7th day.· A great storm, with rain.
    8th day. A wind sprang up and the weather was chilly.
    20th day. There was a west wind 1 and hail. The weather
was cold, and people wore three wadded garments.
     21St day. The Viceroy 2 of Tsukushi sent a mounted
messenger with a message to the Empress, saying :-" The
 Prince, the younger brother of Kyoki, son of the King of
 Pekche, has arrived in company of the tribute Envoys."
     25 th day. It was reported from the province of Ohomi that
 llail had fallen there one inch in diameter.
     28th day. The Empress removed her residence from the
temporary palace to the new Palace of Itabuki in Asuka.
     5th month, 16th da~y. There was an eclipse of the moon.
     6th month, 13th day. The Viceroy of Tsukushi sent a
 mounted messenger with a message to the Empress, say-
 ing :-" Koryo is sending Envoys to our Court." When
 the 1Iinisters heard this, they said :-" Koryo has not come to XXIV 10.
 Court since the year Kanoto i,3 and this year they are coming
 to Court."
     23 rd day. The Pekche tribute-ships anchored in the port of
Naniha.
  Autumn, 7th month, 3rd day. Several Daibu were sent to
the district (Government house) of Naniha to inspect the
Pekche tribute and presents. Hereupon the Daibu inquired of
the tribute Envoys, saying :-" The national tribute offered by
  1 The west \vind in Japan COines fronl North China and Siberia, and

reselnbles our east \vind in character.
  ! Dazai.                              Aen.
                                        3     639.
         J26
         180                           NIHONGI.

           you is less than by previous precedent. The articles sent to
           the Oho-omi are of no better quality than those which were
           returned in a former year; and, in defiance of previous prece-
           dent, no articles at all have been brought for the Ministers.
           How is this? "
               The senior Envoy, the Tal-sol, Chit-sa, and the junior Envoy,
           the Eun-sol, Kun-syon, together answered and said :-" Th'e
           deficiency will be speedily supplied." Chit-sa was a son of the
           hostage, the Tal-sol, Mu-cha.
               In this month the water of the Mamuta pond stank greatly,
           and was covered with small grubs, which had black mouths
           and white bodies.
               8th month, 15th day. The water of the lVlamuta pond
           changed, and became like indigo juice. Its surface was covered
           with dead grubs. Moreover the running water in the drains
           became coagulated to the thickness of three or four inches, and
           the fishes, both great and small, stank, as when they are
           scorched to death in summer. They were therefore unfit for
           food.
                9th month, 6th day. The Emperor Okinaga tarashi-hi
            hiro-nuka was buried in the Oshi-zaka Misasagi.
                     A certain writing says :-" The Emperor Hironuka is
                  also called the Emperor Takechi."
                11th day. Kibi no Shima, the Empress's grandmother, died.
                17th day. The Empress instructed Wite, Hashi no Saba no
            Muraji, to superintend the funeral ceremonies of her grand-
            mother. From the time that the Empress's grandmother took
            ill, until the beginning of the mourning, the Empress never left
XXIV. I I. her bedside, and was assiduous in attending to her nourishment.
                19th day. The Empress's grandmother was buried on the
            Hill of Mayumi.
                On this day there was great rain, with hail.
                30th day. The work of constructing the tomb of the
            Empress's grandmother was discontinued, and presents of
            silk and cloth 1 were given to the Omi, the Muraji, and Torno
            no Miyakko, each according to his rank.
                In this month the water of the Mamuta pond gradually
            changed, and became white. Moreover, it was no longer ill-
            smelling.
                           1   Of hemp or mulberry bark fibre.
                                KOGYOKU.                              181

   Winter, loth month, 3rd day. The Ministers and Torno no
Mi)Takko were entertained in the Court of the Imperial
Residence, and the matter of bestowing Dignities was con-
sidered. Ultimately instructions to the Governors of Provinces
v/ere given as before ordered, and no change was made. They
were told to proceed to their posts, and to be watchful in
respect to their administration.
   6th day. Yemishi, Saga no Oho-ami, was unable from
illness to attend at Court. On his own private authority, he
granted his son Iruka a purple cap, which made him rank, as
it were, with the Oho-ami. He also called the younger
brother (of Iruka) Mononobe no Oho-omi. The Oho-omi's
grandmother ,vas the younger sister of Mononobe no Yugehi
no Ohomuraji. Therefore, by reason of his mother's proper(y,
he acquired an influential position in the world.
   12th day'. Iruka, Soga no Omi, plotted b)T himself to set
aside the Kamutsumiya Princes,l and to establish Furubito no
Oho)Ye as Emperor. At this time there was a children's song
which said : -
                            By the cliff,
                       A little Blonkey is cooking rice :
                       Pass on-having stolen
                       Eyen the very rice,
                       o thou l1lountain-goat:! old lnan.
       One book says :-" Iruka, Soga no Omi, had a profound
    repulsion for the prestige and fame of the Kam utsumiya
    Princes throughout the Empire, and plotted by himself
    ho\v to become established in their stead."
  In this month the ,vater of the Mamuta pond became clear
again.
  11th month, 1St duy. Iruka, Saga no Omi, sent the Shutoko,
Kose no Tokudai no Omi, and the Dainin, I-Iashi no Saba no XXIV. 12.
Muraji, to seize Prince Yamashiro no Ohoy'e and the rest at
Ikaruga.
       One book say's :-" With !{ose no Tokudai no Omi and
    Yamato no Miima-kahi no Obito as commanders."
  1   The sons of Shotoku Daishi.
  ~ The katna-shishi is probably the animal no\v kno\vn as the kamoshika, a
kind of antelope \vith a shaggy fleece. Vide" Sato\v and Ha\ves' Handbook,"
2nd ed. p. [41]. See belo,y, XXIV. 14, for an interpretation of this poem.
         J26                          NIHONGI.

             Hereupon the slave Minari and several tens of toneri came
          forth and fought in their defence. Hashi no Saba no Muraji
          was hit by an arrow and died, and the troops were afraid, and
          retreated. They said to one another :-" The saying' one
          man as good as a thousand' is applicable to Minari."
          Yamashiro no Ohoye accordingly took the bones of a horse
          and flung them into his sleeping-chamber, and eventually,
          taking with hiID his consort, and accompanied by the younger
          members of his family, seized an opportunity to escape, and
          concealed himself on Mount Ikoma. Miwa no Fumuya no
          Kimi, a toneri named Tame no Muraji, and his daughter Uda
          no Morowoshi, and Ise no Abe no I{atafu followed him.
             Rose no Tokudai no Omi and the others, having burnt the
          Palace of Ikaruga, found bones among the ashes, and wrongly
          imagined that the Prince was dead. So they raised the siege
          and withdrew. Therewith Prince Yamashiro no Ohoye and
          his companions tarried on the mountain for four or five days.
          They had nothing to eat or drink. Miwa no Fumuya no Kimi
          advanced, and advised him, saying :-" Let us, I pray thee, go
          over to the Miyake ofFukakusa, and thence on horseback towards
          the Eastern provinces. Let us make Mibu our headquarters,
          and having raised troops, come back and fight. Our success
          is not doubtful." Prince Yamashiro no Olloye and his com-
          panions 1 answered and said :-" If we did as thou sayest, we
          should certainly succeed. In my heart, however, I desire for
          ten years not to impose a burden on the people. For the
          sake of one person only, why should I distress the ten thousand
          subjects? Moreover, I do not wish it to be said by after
          generations that for my sake anyone has mourned the loss of a
XXIV. 13. father or mother. Is it only when one has conquered in battle
          that he is to be called a hero? Is he not also a hero who has
          made firm his country at the expense of his own life?" There
          was a man who from afar perceived the Princes of Kamutsu-
          nliya on the mountains, and went back and told this to Iruka,
          Saga no Omi. When Iruka heard this he was much afraid,
          and immediately set in movement an armed force. Then he
          informed Kuni-oshi, Takamuku no Omi, where the Prince was,
          and said :-" Thou must at once proceed to the mountain
          and arrest the Prince." Kuni-oshi answered and said :-" Thy
                1 The speech itself can be only that of Prince Yamashiro.
                                   KOGYOl{U.                            J26

slave guards the Imperial Palace, and dares not go else\vhere."
Iruka was about to go himself when the Imperial Prince
Furubito no Ohoye arriyed, panting for breath, and asked
whither he \vas going. Iruka informed him of the whole
circumstances. Then the Imperial Prince Furubito said:-
" The rat lies down in its hole and lives; it leaves its hole and
dies." Accordingly Iruka gave up the idea of going, and sent
commanders to make search at Ikoma, but they were l1ever
able to find him.
   Hereupon Prince Yamashiro no Ohoye and his ~ompanions
returned fronl the mountain and entered the Temple of Ikaruga.
The commanders straightway surrounded the Temple with
troops. Then Prince Yamashiro no Ohoye sent 1'1i\va no
Fumuya no Kimi with a message to the commanders, saying : -
" If I had raised an army, and attacked Iruka, I should cer-
tainly have conquered. But for the sake of one person, I was
unwilling to destroy the people. Therefore I deliver up myself
to Iruka." Finally he and the younger members of his family',
with his consorts, strangled themselves at the same tin1e, and
died together. At this time five coloured banners and umbrellas
shone in the sky, and descending, hung oyer the Temple to
the sound of various music. Everyone looked up \yith cries
of admiration. At length they were pointed out to Iruka, upon
which the banners and umbrellas were changed into a black XXI\'. 14.
cloud, so that Iruka was unable to see them.
   Yemishi, Soga no Oho-omi, hearing that Prince Yamashiro
no Ohaye and his people had all been destroyed by Iruka, chid
him angrily, saying :-" Ah! Iruka! Thou are foolish ex-
ceedingly, arId clost arbitrarily practise outrage. Is not thine
own life precarious? "
   The people of that day explained the application of the above
poem 1 as follows:-
   By "the cliff H is meant I{amutsumiya: 2 by the "little
monkey" is meant Hayashi no Omi [Hayashi no Omi is
Iruka]: by "cooking rice" is intended the burning of
Kamutsumiya: by" Pass on, having stolen even the very
rice, oh thou mountain-goat old man,'" Prince Yamashiro's
head of hair, which was streaked \\Tith grey so as to resemble

     1   See above, XXIv"'. I I.               t   i.e. Upper Palace.
          J26                           NIHONGI.

           that of a wild goat, is alluded to. Another explanation is that
           it refers to his having abandoned his Palace and concealed
           himself deep among the mountains.
              This year the Heir Apparent to the throne of Pekche,
            Yo Phung-chy"ang, set loose and kept four hives of honey-bees
           on Mount ~Iiv~Ta; but they did not multiply their kind.
 A.D. 644.    3rdyear, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. Nakatomi no Kamako \
           no Muraji ,vas appointed Chief 2 of the Shinto religion. He
           declined the appointment sev"eral times, and would not take it
           up. On the plea of ill-health he went away and lived at
            Mishima. At this time the Imperial Prince Karu had an
           ailment of the leg ,vhich prevented him from coming to
XXI,T. 15. Court. No,v Nakatomi no Kamako no Muraji had before this
           a friendship for the Imperial Prince Karu, and therefore went
           to his Palace to spend the night in attendance on him. The
            Imperial Prince Karu, kno,ving ,veIl that Nakatomi no Kamako
            no Muraji ,vas a man of exalted sentiments and of a bearing
           which made rudeness to him impossible, sent his favourite
            consort, a lady' of the Abe House, to sweep out a separate
            room and to spread high a ne\v sleeping-mat. There was
            nothing which was not provided for him, and the respect shown
            him was extraordinary". Nakatomi no Kamako no Muraji was
            very sensible of (the cordiality" of) his reception, and addressed
            the toneri, say'ing :-" I have been treated with a special kind-
            ness which exceeds all that I had expected. Who would not
            make him Ruler oyer the Empire?" The toneri accordingly
            reported to the Imperial Prince what he had said. The
            Irnperial Prince ,vas greatly' pleased.
               Nakatomi no Kamako no Muraji was a man of an upright
            and loyal character and of a reforming disposition. He \vas
            indignant with Saga no Iruka for breaking down the order of
            Prince and Vassal, of Senior and Junior, and cherishing veiled
            designs upon the State. One after another he associated with
            the Princes of the Imperial line, trying them in order to
            discover a wise ruler ,v-ho might establish a great reputation.
             He had accordingl~y fixed his mind on Naka no Ohoye, but for
            want of intimate relations ,vith him he had been for so far
             unable to unfold his inner sentiments. Happening to be
                   1   j1Jl ire fa, Kamutsukasa no Karoi.t


                   2   Better kno,,·n as Kamatari Ko. See below, XXV. 54.
                                KOGY·OKU.                                 J26

one of a football l party in which Naka no Ohoye played at the
foot of the keyaki tree of the Temple of Hukoji, he observed the XXIV. 16.
(Prince's) leathern shoe falloff with the ball. Placing it on the
palm of his hand, he knelt before the Prince and humbly offered
it to him.. Naka no Ohoye in his turn knelt down and respect-
fully received it. From this time they became mutual friends,
and told each other all their thoughts. There was no longer
any concealment bet\veen them. They feared, however, that
jealous suspicions might be caused ~y their frequent meetings,
and they' both took in their hands yellow rolls, 2 and studied
personally' the doctrines of Chow 3 and Confucius with the
 learned teacher of Minabuchi.' Thus they at lepgth while on
their wa)T there and back, walking shoulder to shoulder,
secretly prepared their plans. On all points they were agreed.
   Now Nakatomi no Kamako no Muraji counselled him,
saying :-" For him who cherishes great projects, nothing is
so essential as support. I pray thee, therefore, take to thee
the eldest daughter of Soga no KuraY'amada no Maro, and
make her thy' consort. \Vhen a friendly marriage relationship
has been established, we can then unfold our desire to associate
him with us in our plans. There is no shorter way to success
than this. N O\V when Naka no Ohoye heard this, he was
much pleased, and acted in accordance with his advice in every
particular. Nakatomi no Kamako no Muraji accordingly went
himself, and as go-between conducted the marriage negotiations
to a successful result. On the night, however, fixed upon for XXI\r. 17 ·
(the consummation of the marriage with) the eldest daughter,
she was stolen away by a relation [his name was Musa no
Omi]. In consequence of this, Kurayamada no Omi was

   1 Dakiu, "strike-ball," the ,vord here used, no,v nleans "polo," for an

account of ,vhich see" Things Japanese," p. 350. But here some kind of
football is evidently nleant. \v·hat kind of football-like ours, or in Chinese
fashion, knocking the ball fronl one to another like a shuttle·cock-does not
appear.
   2 i.e. Chinese books.

  3 Chow, the :;upposed author of the Chow.li, a set of rules for the guidance

of officials. Vide Mayers, p. 20.
  4 No doubt the Sh6an above mentioned, XXII. 21.          It is often far from
clear, as here, ,vhether a proper name is to he understood as a man's name
or as the name of his place of residence. The latter meaning fades into the
former.
         186
         J26                             NIIIONGI.

          grieved and alarmed. He looked up and looked down, and
          knew not what to do. His younger daughter, wondering at
          her father's grief and alarm, went up to him and inquired of
          him, saying :-" Why art thou sorrowful and in fear? " Her
          father told her the cause. The younger daughter said :-" I
          beseech thee, do not grieve, but offer me. It is still not too
          late." Her father ,vas greatly rejoiced, and at length offered
          this daughter. She served (the Prince) with sincerity of heart,'
          and without any shyness whatever.
             Nakatomi no Kamako no Muraji recommended Komara,
          Saheki no Nluraji, and Amida,~ Katsuraki no Waka-inu-kahi 3
          no Muraji, to Naka no Ohoye, saying, &c., &c.
             3rd month. An owl brought forth young in the Miyake of
          Ohotsu belonging to Toyora no Oho-omi.
             It was reported from the Province of Yamata :-" Lately a man
          of the Uda district, called Oshizaka no Atahe, went with a boy
          for a walk over the snow. They climbed Mount Uda, and there
          the)T saw purple mushrooms growing out of the snow six inches
          or more in height, and covering about four chu. 4 So he made
          the boy gather them, and went back and showed them to his
          neighbours. They all said :-' We do not know them,' and
          suspected that they were poisonous. Hereupon Oshizaka no
          Atahe and the boy boiled and ate them. They were very
          savoury. The next day they went to see, but there were none
XXIV. 18. at all. Oshizaka no Atahe and the boy, from having eaten the
          mushroom soup, were free from disease, and lived long. Some
          one said :-' Probably the common people, not knowing the
          herb of long life,a mistakenly called it a mushroom."
             Summer, 6th month, 1st day. Ohotomo no Miimakahi no
          Muraji presented to the Empress a lily, the stem of which \\'as
          eight feet in length, separated as to the lower part, but joined
          together as to the end.

           1 Lit. a red heart.           2 Net-ricefield.          3 Puppy-keepet.

           4 The cb6 is at present, according to Hepburn, a land measure of 3000
         tsubos, or 108,000 square feet.
           5 The" Yengishiki" describes the ~ ~ as a plant resenlbling coral in

         shape, with clustering leaves and branches. Some are red, others purple,
         others black, others golden-coloured, \\~hile some change their colour in the
         four seasons. I t blossoms three tin1es a year, and gives long life to the
         person who eats it.
                                KOGYOKU.                                J26

   3rd day. It was reported from the district of Shiki no
Rami :-" There was a man on Mount Miwa who, seeing a
monkey having its noonday sleep, stealthily took it by the
elbow, but without doing it bodily harm. The monkey kept
its eyes closed, and sang a song, saying : -

                    I t can be none but the soft hand
                    Of a friend who stands
                    On the opposite hill
                    That has taken nlY hand:
                    Whose happy hand is it
                    -Oh happy, happy hand ! -
                    That hath taken my hand? 1

   The man was amazed at the monkey's song. He set it free
and came away. This was a portent, indicating, after many
years had passed, the siege of the Kamutsumiya Princes on
Mount lkoma by Soga no Kura-tsukuri."
   6th day. Among the lotuses in the Tsurugi pond, there was
one which had two flowers on one stem. Toyora no Oho-omi
inferred without sufficient reason that this portended the future
prosperity of Saga no Orni. So he made a picture 2 with XXlv\ 19
golden ink, and presented it to the sixteen feet high Buddha of
Great Hokoji.
   In this month the witches and wizards 3 of the whole
country, breaking off leafy branches and hanging them with
tree fibre/ watched the time when the Oho-omi was crossing a
bridge and vied with one another in addressing to him subtle
interpretations of divine words. They were in great numbers,
so that they could not be distinctly heard. Old people said

   1 The metre belongs to no recognized standard.    The text of this song is
probably corrupt. As it stands it is very obscure, though, perhaps, not more
so than we should expect {rotn a drowsy monkey. The Japanese com-
nlentators vary widely in its interpretation. Dr. Florenz's version will be
found to differ from the one given above. I should be sorry to say that
 mine is any improvement.
   2 Or writing-.

   a The interlinear Kana has Katnunai (for Kamunagi), which Yamada
renders by miko. See \tol. I. p. 79, Note.
   4 In the nlanner of ofterings to the Gods.   The Chinese characters for
tree..fibre now Inean cotton, which is a much later introduction into Japan.
The fibre was probably that of the inner bark of the paper lnulberry.
           188
           J26                                 NIHONGI.

           that this "pas a sign of changes. At this time three popular
           songs "pere made. The first was : -
                                    }~rOln afar off
                                    SOll1ething is heard-
                                    The jungle-plain of Shillla. 1

              The second "pas : -
                               Though I have slept,
                               ~ ot allo\ving a noise to be made
                               By the pheasants of the Ahanl1 plain,
                               On yonder side,
                               Others allow them to make a noise.

              The third ,vas : -
                                    I kno\v not the face,
                                    X or do I even know the house
                                    l)f hinl ,vho did it,
                                    Having led me
XXlV.20.                            Into the Little \\Tood.~

              Autunln, 7th month. A man of the neighbourhood of the
           I{iver Fuji irl the East Country named Ohofu Be no Oho urged
           his fellov{-Yillagers to \vorship an insect, saying :-" This is the
           God of the Everlasting \Vorld. Those \vho ,vorship this God
           ,viII have long life and riches." At length the ,vizards and
           \vitches, pretending an inspiration of the Gods, said :-" Those
           who worship the God of the Everlasting World \viII, if poor,
           become rich, and, if old, ,viII become young ~gain." So they
           lTIOre and more persuaded the people to cast out the valuables
           of their houses, and to set out by the roadside sake, vegetables,
           and the six dOlnestic animaIs.3 They also made them cry out:
           - " The ne\v riches have come!" Both in the countr)' and in
           the metropolis people took the insect of the Everlasting Warid

              1 Shilna is the OhO-01Ui's place of abode.       The" sonlething heard" is said
           to luean the explanations of the ,vizards above referred to.
              j Wood (Hayashi) is an allusion to Hayashi no Olni. The conlmentators
           ha'"e done their best to explain the political allusions in the above Yerses,
           but they do not at all agree aillong themselves, and are none of them very
           satisfactory. See belo"", XXI\T. 26.
              3 i.e. the flesh of these anilnals, viz., of the horse, ox, sheep, pig, dog, fo\vI.

           But this is Inerely a Chinese phrase for dOlllestic animals generally. There
           is no reason to suppose that the Japanese had sheep at this tinle.
                                KOGVOKU.                                    189
                                                                            J26

and, placing it in a pure place, with song and dance invoked
happiness. They threw away their treasures, but to no
purpose whatever. The loss and waste \vas extreme. Here-
upon Kahakatsu, Kadono no Hada no ~liyakko, was \vroth
that the people should be so much deluded, and slew 1 Ohofu
Be no Oho. The wizards and witches were intimidated, and
ceased to persuade people to this worship. The nlen of that
time made a song, saying : -
                    Udzumasa 2
                    Has executed
                    The God of the Everlasting World
                    Who we \vere told
                    Was the very God of Gods.

  This insect is usually bred on orange trees, and sometimes on
the Hosoki. 3 It is over four inches in length, and about as XXIV. 21.
thick as a thumb. It is of a grass-green colour with black
spots, and in appearance entirely resembles the silkworm. 4
   Winter, 11th month. Iruka no Omi, son of Yemishi, Saga
no Oho-omi, built two houses on the Amagashi Hill. The
Oho-omi's house was called the Palace-Gate: ~ Iruka's
house was called the Valley-Palace-Gate. Their sons and
daughters were styled Princes and Princesses. Outside
the houses palisades were constructed, and an armoury was
erected by the gate. At each gate there was set a tank
for water, and several tens of wooden hooks as a provision in
case of fire. 6 Stout fellows were constantly employed to guard
the houses, with arms in their hands.
   The Oho-ami made Osa no Atahe build the Temple of Hoko-
nuki on Mount Ohoniho. Moreover, he built a house on the
east side of Mount Unebi and dug a pond,' so as to make of it a
  1  The original is tr, strike, which I take to be a euphelnislll for slay.
  ~  i.e. Hada no Miyakko.
  3 The Chinese characters used mean "creeping pepper.~'             I have not
been able to identify this plant or tree. I t is also called itachi-hajikami, i.e.
weasel-ging-er.
  .. It was evidently a caterpillar of some kind.
  a The interlinear Kana version has Uhe no ~{ikado, Upper Palace,
which suggests that a character has been lost here.
   6 A pole with a hook at the end is in use by Japanese firen1en at the
present day for pulling down houses.
  7 i.e. a moat.
  VOL. II.                                                             o
         190
         J26                             NIIIONGI.

            castle. He erected an armoury, and provided store of arrows.
            In his goings out and comings in he was alway's surrounded by
            an attendant company of fifty soldiers. These sturd~y fellows
            were called the Eastern 1 Company. The people of the various
            Uji ~ came to his gate, and waited upon him. He called him-
            self their father, and them his boys. The Ay'a no Atahe
            attended wholly upon the two houses. a
 A.D. 645·     4th year, Spring, 1St nlonth. On mountain-peaks, by river-
            sides, or among shrines and' temples, there ,vas a something
            visihle afar, and there was heard a humming of monkeys, as
            it were ten or sometimes twenty' together. But when one
XXIV. 22. approached to see what it might be, nothing ,vas visible. There
            was still heard the sound of crying and screaming, but no one
           was able to distinguish any bodily form.
                   i\.n old book says :-" In this year the capital was
                 removed to Naniha, and this was an indication that the
                 Itabuki palace would become a waste."
              The men of that day said :-" These are the messengers of
           the Great Deity of Ise." 4
               Summer, 4th month, 1st day. The Koryo student-priests
           said that their fellow-student Kura-tsukuri no Tokushi had
           made friends with a tiger, and had learnt from him his arts,
           such as to make a barren mountain change into a green
           mountain, or to cause yellow earth to become clear water, and
           all manner of wonderful arts too many to enumerate. More-
           over, the tiger bestowed on him his needle, saying :-" Be
           watchful! be watchful, and let no one know! Treated with
           this, there is no disease which may not be cured." Truly, as
           the tiger had said, there was no disease which ,vas not cured
           when treated by it. 5 Tokushi always kept the needle concealed
           in a pillar. Afterwards the tiger broke the pillar and ran away,
           taking the needle with hin1. The Land of Ko~yo, hearing that
           Tokushi wished to return, put him to death by poison.
              6th month, 8th day. (Prince) Naka no Ohoye secretly

           1 Perhaps because his house stood on the eastern side of Mount Unebi. An

        interlinear gloss has Adzuma or East Country. The Soga family had luuch
        to do with the Eastern provinces, as the name of its head, viz. Yemishi (Aino)
        sug-gests. Possibly the guard here spoken of consisted of Ainos.
          2 N able houses.                       3 Of the father and son.

          4 The Sun-goddess.                     f) Acupuncture is no doubt meant.
                             KOGYOKU.                                J26

addressed Kurayamada no Mara no Omi, saying :-" On the
day that the three Corean kingdoms present their tribute I
will surely cause thee to read aloud their memorial," and
\vent on to inform him of his plan for slaying Iruka no Omi.
Mara no Omi respectfully assented.
   12th day. The Empress held a Court in the Taik)70kuden. 1 XXIV. 23.
(Prince) Furubito no Ohoye was in attendance.
    Nakatomi no Kamako no Muraji, knowing that Saga, Iruka
no Omi, was of a very suspicious nature, and wore a sword
day and night, showed the performers an expedient to make
him lay it aside. Iruka no Omi laughed, and, having un-
girded his sword, entered and took his place in attendance by
the throne. Kurayamada Maro no Omi advanced and read
aloud the memorials of the three kingdonls of Corea. Here-
upon (Prince) Naka no 0 hoye ordered the Guard of the Gates
to fasten all the t\velve gates at the same time, and to allow
nobody to pass. Then he called together the Guards of the
 Gates to one place and promised them rewards. (Prince)
 Naka no Ohoye then took in his own hands a long spear and
 hid it at one side of the Hall. N akatomi no Kamako no
 Muraji and his people, armed with bows and arrows, lent their
 aid. Katsumaro, Ama no Inukahi no Muraji, was sent to give
 two swords in a case to Komara, Saheki no Muraji, and Amida,
 Katsuraki no Waka-inu-kahi no Muraji, with the message,
 " Up! up! ma.ke haste to slay hinl." Komaro and the other
 tried to send down their rice with water, but were so, frightened
 that they brought it up again. 2 Nakatomi no Karnako no
 Muraji chid and encouraged them. Kurayamada l\faro no
 Omi feared lest the reading of the memorials should come to XXIV. 24.
 an end before Komaro and his companion arrived. His body
 was moist with streaming s\veat, his voice was indistinct, and
 his hands shook. Kuratsukuri no Omi wondered at this,
  and inquired of him, saying :-" Why clost thou tremble?"
  Yamada Maro answered and said :-It is being near the
  Empress that makes me afraid, so that unconsciously the
  perspiration pours from me." NaRa no Ohoye, seeing that

   1 The ;~   ti,  Taikyoku, is the Absolute or first principle of Chinese
 philosophy, from which proceed the Yin and Yang. The Taikyokuden was
 the Great Hall of Audience.
   2 Probably only to be taken Inetaphorically.
         J26                             N II-IONGI.
          !(omaro and his companion, intimidated by Iruka's prestige,
          \vere trying to shirk and did not come forward, cried out
          " Yrt ! " and forthwith coming out \vith I(omaro and his com-
          panion, fell upon Iruka without warning, and with a sword cut
          open his head and shoulder. Iruka started up in alarn1, when
          !{omaro with a turn of his hand flourished his s\vord and
          \vounded him on the leg. Iruka rolled over to \vhere the
          Empress sat, and bowing his head to the ground, said:-
          " She who occupies the hereditary Dignity is the Child of
          Heaven. I, Her servant, am conscious of no crinle, and I
          beseech Her to deign to make examination into this." The
          Empress was greatly shocked, and addressed ~ aka no Ohoye,
          say'ing :-" I know not what has been done. \\That is the
          meaning of this?" Naka no Ohoye prostrated himself on the
          earth, and made representation to Her Majesty, saying:-
          "I{uratsukuri wished to destroy utterly the Celestial House,
          and to subvert the Solar Dignity. Is Kuratsukuri to be sub-
          stituted for the Celestial descendants?" The En1press at
          once got up, and went into the interior of the Palace. Komaro,
          Saheki no Muraji, and Amida, Waka-inu-kahi no ~Iuraji, sle\v
          Iruka no ami. On this day rain fell, and puddle-water over-
          flowed the Court. They covered Kuratsukuri's body with
          screens of matting. 1 When Furubito no Ohoye sa\v this, he
XXIV. 25. ran into his private palace, and said to his people :-" The
          Coreans have slain Kuratsukuri no Omi. :\Iy heart is sore."
          Then he went into his sleeping-chamber, shut the door, and
          \vould not come out.
             Naka no Ohoye presently entered the Temple of Hokoji,
          which he fortified and prepared to defend. The Imperial
          Princes, Ministers, Daibu, Omi, Muraji, Torno no Miyakko,
          and Kuni no Miyakko, one and all followed him. Men were
          sent to deliver the body of Kuratsukuri no Omi to Yemishi no
          Oho-omi. Hereupon the Aya no Atahe 2 assembled all their
          clan. Clad in armour and with weapons in their hands, they
          came to the assistance of the Oho-omi, and formed an army.
          Naka no Ohoye sent the General Rose no Tokuda :-; no Omi
          to explain to the rebel band that ever since the creation of
          Heaven and Earth there were lords and vassals, and to make
               1   Or mats and screens.              ~ See abo\"e, XXIV. 21.
                                   3 Called Tokudai abo\'c.
                                     KOGVOKU.                              193

himself acquainted with the cause of this uprIsIng. Hereupon
Kunioshi, Takanluku no Omi, addressed the Aya no Atahe,
saying :-" We are bound to receive (capital) punishment on
account of our Lord's 1 eldest son. Moreover, it is not
doubtful that to-day or to-morrow swift execution awaits
the Oho-ami. This being so, for whom should we fight to no
purpose, rendering ourselves all liable to be put to death? "
When he had finished speaking, he ungirded his sword, flung
away his bow, and went away, deserting the cause. The rebel
troops, moreover, following his example, dispersed and ran
away.
   13th day. Yemishi, Saga no Omi, and his people, when
about to be executed, burnt the History of the Emperors, the
History of the Country, and the objects of value. Yesaka
Funa no Fubito straightway hastened to seize the burning
History of the Country, and delivered it up to Naka no Ohoye.
On this day permission was given for the interment of the
bodies of Yenlishi, Soga no Omi, and Kuratsukuri in tombs.~
Lament for them was also allowed.
   Upon this, some explained the first of the popular songs,3
saylng:-
   The song which says-

                               From afar off                                     XXIV. 26.
                               Something is heard-
                               The jungle-plain of Shima,

prefigured the building of palaces together at the house of
Shima no Oho-omi, and the secret conspiracy of Naka no
Ohoye and Nakatomi, Kamako no Muraji in the cause of
justice, \vith their plot to kill Iruka.
  The second of the popular songs was explained as follows : -
  The song which says-

                      Though I have slept,
                      Not allo\ving a noise to be made
                      By the pheasants of the Ahanu plain
                      On yonder side,
                      Others allow them to make a noise,


 1   Yen1ishi.                  2   Haka, not misasagi.   See above, XXIV. 8.
 S   See above, XX I V'. 19.
194
J26                       NJHONGI ..

was ominous of the Kamutsumiya Princes, of gentle dis-
position, and none of them guilty of a crime, being harmed
by Iruka, and of Heaven bringing about his death by the
hands of others, though they could not themselves have their
revenge.
  The third popular song was explained as follows : -
  The song which says-
                   I kno\v not the face,
                   Nor do I even kno\v the house
                   Of him \vho did it,
                   Having led me
                   Into the little \vood,

was ominous of Iruka no Omi heing suddenly slain in the
Palace by Komaro, Saheki no Muraji, and Amida, Wakainu-
kahi no Muraji.
  14th day. The Dignity was abdicated in favour of the
Imperial Prince Karu, and Naka no Ohoye was made Prince
Imperial.
                            BOOK XXV.

             'I'HE EMPEROR AME-YORODZU TOYO-HI. 1


                       (KOTOKU 2 lENNO)

THE Emperor     Ame-yorodzu toyo-hi was a younger brother by
the same mother of the Empress Ame-toyo-takara ikashi-hi
tarashi-hime. 3 He honoured the religion of Buddha and
despised the Way of the Gods" [as is instanced by his cutting
down the trees of the shrine of Iku-kuni-dama]. He was of a
gentle disposition, and loved men of learning. He made no
distinction of noble and mean, and continually dispensed
beneficent edicts.
   In the fourth year, the sixth month, and the fourteenth day
of her reign, the Empress Ame-toyo-takara ikashi-hi tarashi-
hime wished to transfer the Dignity to N aka no Ohoye, and
 made order, saying ._" etc., etc." Naka no Ohoye, when he
retired (from her presence), informed Nakatomi, I{amako no
 Muraji, who advised him, saying :-" Furubito no Ohoye is
 Your Highness's elder brother: the Imperial Prince Karu is
 Your Highness'ls maternal uncle. If at present, during the life.. xxv. 2.
 time of Furubito no Ohoye, Your Highness should ascend to
 the Imperial Dignity, it would be a transgression against the
 sentiment of respect and obedience due from younger brothers.
 Would it not, therefore, be better to raise your maternal uncle
 to the throne, and so respond to the expectations of the
 people?" Upon this Naka no Ohoye was profoundly pleased
 with this advice and reported it privately to the Empress. The

  1 Heaven-myriad-c:'.bundant-sun.

  , \Tirtue of filial piety. There is much evidence in this reign of the exten-
sion and development of the Imperial power in the provinces.
   3 Kogyoku Tenno.                              " i.e. Shinto.
        J26                            N II-lONGI.
       Empress Ame-toyo-tC!-kara ikashi-hi tarashi-hime granted the
       Imperial Seal and resigned the Dignity to the Imperial Prince
       Karu, and made a rescript, saying- :-" Thou, the Imperial Prince
       I~aru, etc., etc." The Imperial Prince Karu declined firmly
       and repeatedly in favour of Furubito no OhoY'e [also called the
        Imperial Prince Furubito no Ohochi]) saying :-" Ohoye no
       Mikoto is the offspring of the former ~mperor,l and he is of
       mature age, for both which reasons it is fit that he should
       occupy the Celestial Dignity." Upon this, Furubito no Ohoye
       left his seat, and, retiring to a distance, folded his arms and
       excused himself, saY'ing :-" Let us comply with the sage will of
       the Empress. \Vh~y shouldst thou take the trouble to transfer
       it to thy servant? It is my desire to renounce the world, and
       to go to Yoshino, there to devote m)~self to the practice of the
       La\\" of Buddha, and thus render support to the Emperor.'"
       "Then he had concluded his refusal, he ungirt the sword \vhich
       he had on, and flung it to the ground. Moreover he gave
       orders to all his household 2 to ungird their swords. That same
       da)~ he went to the Temple of Hokoji, and there, between the
       Hall of Buddha and the pagoda, he shaved off his beard and
xxv 3- hair, and put on the kesa. In consequence the Imperial Prince
       Karu \vas unable to persist in his refusal, and, ascending the
       throne, assumed the Dignity.
          At this time Ohotomo no Nagatoko no Muraji [his cognomen
       \vas Mumakahi], girt \vith a golden quiver, stood on the right
       hand of the throne,3 and Inugami no Takebe no Kimi, girt with
       a golden quiver, stood on the left hand of the throne. The
       functionaries, Omi, Muraji, Kuni no Miyakko, Torno no Miyakko
       and the 180 Be, ranged in order, went round 4 making obeisance.
       On this day the title of Ku-so-bu 5 was conferred on the Empress
       TOY'o-takara, and Naka no Ohoye was made Prince Imperial,
       Abe no U chimaro no Omi was made Sa-dai-jin, and Soga no
       Kura)ramada Ishikaha no Maro no Omi \vas made U-dai-jin.&

          1   JOluei Tenno_                          ~ The toneri.
          3  Probably a raised daIS is meant
          4 Probably passing- before the Emperor in rotation, as at our levees.

          ~ Empress Do\\-ager. Lit. Empress grandmother or ancestress.
          4$ Sadaijin and Udaijin are respectively Great l'vlinister of the Left and

        Great Minister of the Right. The left has precedence of the right in these
        n1atters. It is the sanle characters \vhich above represent Oho-ami which
                                 KorOKU.                                    197

A great brocade cap of honour was given to Nakatomi no
I{amako no Muraji, and he \vas made Naijin,1 with an increased
feudal revenue of a large number of houses,~ etc., etc. Naka-
tomi no Kamako no Muraji cherished the most sincere loyalty.
Trusting to his power as ruling Minister, he took place over the
various functionaries. In respect therefore to advancements
and dismissals, taking measures or abandoning them, every-
thing was done in accordance \vith his counsel, etc., etc. 3 The XX'T. 4·
Buddhist priest 4 Min Hoshi and Kuromaro Takamuko no
Fubito \vere made national doctors.&
   15th day. Golden tablets \vere granted to the Obo-omi, Abe
no Kurahashi no Maro, and to the Oho-omi, Soga no Yamada
no Ishikaha no Maro. [One book says they were granted
refined gold.]
   19th day. The Emperor, the Empress Do\vager, and the
Prince Imperial summoned together the Ministers under the
great tsuki 6 tree, and made an oath appealing to the Gods of
Heaven and Earth, and saying : -
       " Heaven covers us: Earth upbears us: the Imperial 7
     way is but one. But in this last degenerate age, the order
     of Lord and Vassal \vas destroyed, until Supreme Heaven
     by Our hands put to death the traitors. Now, from this xxv. 5·
     time forward, both parties shedding their heart's blood,
     the Lord will esche\v double methods of government, and
     the Vassal will avoid duplicity in his service of the


are here used for daijin. That a change in the 1110de of reading thenl took
place at some time is certain, but it is ilnpossible to fix it exactly. Oho-olni
is retained below, though daijin is possibly more correct. Sadaijin and
Udaijin have been in use in our own day.
   1 Minister (Omi) of the Interior, i.e. of the Household, a rank next after

that of Prime Minister.
   2 Of serfs.

   3 The "Shukai" editor says the etc., etc. 111arks a hiatus in the MS.

much to be deplored. The previous two sentences are a quotation fronl a
Chinese history.
   t The word used is Shamon, the equivalent of the Sansk. S'ramana.         Vide
Eitel, p. 157. Min Hoshi i~ probably the priest who studied in China,
and whose astronomical knowledge is above referred to. Hoshi is a priestly
rank, the Sansk. U padhyaya.
   5 Hakase, Inen of learning-not medical men.

   6 Planera.                                                   7 Or Divine.
         J26                              NIHON"GI.

               sovereign! On him who breaks this oath, Heaven will
               send a curse and earth a plagu~, demons will sla~y them,
               and men will smite them. This is as manifest as the sun
               and moon." 1
             The style 4th year of the Empress Amefttoyo-takara ikashi-hi
          tarashi-hime was altered to Daikwa, 1St ~year.2
A.D. 645·    Daikwa, 1st year, Autumn, 7th month, 2nd day. The
          Imperial Princess Hashibito, daughter of the Emperor Okinaga
          tarashi-hi hiro-nuka,3 was made Empress. Two consorts were
          appointed. The senior was W o-tarashi-hime, daughter of the
          Oho-omi, Abe no Kurahashi no Maro. She was the mother of
          the Imperial Prince Arima. The junior consort ,vas Chi-
          iratsume, daughter of the Oho-omi, Saga no Yamada no
          Ishikaha no Maro.
             10th day. Koryo, Pekche, and Silla all sent Envoys at the
          same time bearing tribute. The Pekche tribute-envo~ys were
          also charged with the office of Envoys from Imna and with the
          Imna tribute. But the Pekch6 Chief Envoy, the Cha-phyong 4
          Yon-pok, fell ill, and remained in the official residence of the
          Port,o so that he did not enter the capital. Rose no Tokuda
          no Omi addressed the Koryo Envoys on the Emperor's behalf,
          saying :-" This is the mandate of the EInperor of Japan, who
          rules the world as a God incarnate. 'The Envoys sent by the
          Emperor and the Envoys sent by the Koryo Sons of the Gods/
 xxv. 6. have a brief past, but a long future. Let them, therefore,
          simply continue to pass backwards and for\vards ,vith friendly
          hearts.' " Next he addressed the Pekche Envoys on the
          Emperor's behalf, saying :-" This is the mandate of the
          Emperor of Japan, who rules the world as a God incarnate.
          'At first, in the reign of our remote Imperial ancestor, the
          Land of Pekche was made an interior Miyake 7 which might be

            1 It may be noted that there is nothing Buddhist or Shinto in this VO\v.
         I t is pure Chines e. I t is not exactly an oath according to our ideas, but an
         imprecation on rebellion.
             2 This is the first introduction of the nengo, $    .., or year-period, -a
         Chinese chronological device. l/ide Introduction to " Sato\v's Chronological
         Tables." Daikwa means great civilization or develop111ent. As a matter
         of fact very revolutionary changes took place in this reign.
             a Jomei Tenno.            4 Minister of the Left.       fJ Doubtless Osaka~

             6 A polite term for 'kings.

             7 i.e. in1mediately dependent on the throne.
                                KOT()KU.                                 199
compared to a three-fold cord. 1 In more recent tin1es Jmna
was handed over to be a dependency of pekche. After that,
Adzumabito, Miwa no Kurikuma no Kimi, "vas sent to inspect
the frontier of the Land of Imna, and the King of Pekche, in
obedience to the Emperor's behest, sho,ved him all the frontier.
Yet there is a deficiency in the tribute, and it is therefore
returned. The articles which are the produce of Imna are
distinctly observed by the Emperor. Now for the future the
countr~y should be noted down as well the tribute \vhich comes
from it. 2 May you, the Cha-phyong and the others, come back
unchanged in appearance,s and speedily bring us a clear
answe~. Adzumabito, ~fiwa no Kimi, and Mumakahi no
Miyakko will now be sent again.' "
   A further Imperial order was given-" Let the wife and
children of Wi-sa, a Talsol of Kwipu, be sent a\vay.''1 •
   12th day. The Emperor gave command to the Oho-ami,
Abe no Kurahashi no Mara, and the Oho-omi, Soga no Ishi-
kaha no Mara, saying :-" The Empire should be ruled b:y
following in the footsteps of the Emperors of antiquity. More- xxv. 7.
over, in )'our government of the Empire, you should preserve
fidelity."
   13th day. The Emperor gave command to the Oho-ami,
Abe no Kurahashi no Maro, and the Oha-ami, Soga no Ishikaha
no Mara, saying :-" Inquire of the Daibu and the hundred
Torno no Miyakko, one after another, as to the methodofmaking
gladness the means of using the people's services.&
   14th day. The Oho-ami, Saga no Ishikaha no Maro,
addressed the Emperor, saying :-" First of all the Gods of
Heaven and Earth should be propitiated by worship; thereafter
affairs of government ought to be considered."
   On this day, Hirafu, Yamato no Aya no Atahe, was sent to

  1 This is explained to mean Pekche, the Japanese authority in Imna, and

the native Kings of Imna.
  2 The lneaning seems to be that, as the Emperor takes special notice of

the produce of Irona, a list should be prepared sho\\'ing what tribute is sent
by Pekche and what by In1na, so that any deficiency may be at once
recognizable.
  3 By sickness or old ag~.

  4 They were probably hostages.       Vide XXIV. 10.
   ft Of reconciling the people to forced labour.
        200                             NIHONGI.

        the province of Wohari and Komaro, Imbe no Obita to the
        province of Mino, to levy offerings for the Gods. 1
           8th month, 5th day. Governors of the Eastern provinces
        were appointed. Then the Governors were addressed as
        follows :-" In accordance with the charge entrusted to Us by
        the Gods of Heaven, We propose at this present for the first
        time to regulate the myriad provinces.
           When you proceed to your posts, prepare registers of all
        the free subjects of the State and of the people under the con-
        trol of others, \vhether great or small. Take account also of
        the acreage ~ of cultivated land. As to the profits arising from
        the gardens and ponds, the water and land, deal with them in
        common with the people':' Moreover it is not competent for
        the provincial Governors, while in their provinces, to decide
        criminal cases, nor are they permitted by accepting bribes to
        bring the people to poverty and misery. When they come up
        to the capital they must not bring large numbers of the people
        in their train. They are only allowed to bring with them the
        Runi no Miyakko and the district officials. 4 But when they
        travel on public business they may ride the horses of their
        department, and eat the food of their department. From the
        rank of Suke i upwards those who obey this law will surely be
        re\varded, while those ""Nho disobey it shall be liable to be
xxv. 8. reduced in cap-rank. On all, from the rank of Hangwan 6
         1   Shinto.
         2   IiiL, ,vhich is here rendered acreage, is the Chinese mo\v, no\v fixed by
       treaty as equal to 733"6- sq. yards. fB is used here in the more general sense
       of cultivated land generally, not nlerely rice-fields. The Kana gloss tahatake
       appears to nle to be put for fB in this wider sense. Dr. Florenz interprets
       this expression differently. He takes hata or hatake to represent IiiL,
       making the \vhole luean rice-land and dry fields-Reis- und Trockenfelder.
          3 Take them into your counsel.
          4 This is the way in \vhich the ·conlmentators construe this passage.      If
       there was any authority for doing so, I should like to take ~~ as equivalent
       to tJf ~" ),\ a few lines above, or to suppose that this phrase has been
       omitted. This would give the meaning, "the serfs of the Kuni no Miyakko
       and of the district." These local Governors usually were Kuni no Miyakko.
          ;) Assistant to a Governor.
          6 The interlinear gloss is Matsurigotobito, i.e. Government-man.        It is
       doubtful whether this and many more of these glosses are anything more
       than translations of the Chinese. The hangwan was a sort of aide of the
       chief local authority. Chancellor, perhaps nearly corresponds to it.
                                 KOTOKU.                                   201

downwards, who accept bribes a fine shall be imposed of double
the amount, and they shall eventually be punished criminally
according to the greater or less heinousness of the case. Nine
men are allowed as attendants on a Chief Governor, seven on an
assistant, and five on a secretary. If this limit is exceeded,
and they are accompanied by a greater number, both chief and
followers shall be punished criminally.
   If there be any persons who lay claim to a title,l but who,
not being Kuni no Miyakko, Torno no Miyakko, or Inaki of
districts by descent, unscrupulously draw up lying memorials,
saying :-' From the time of our forefathers we have had
charge of this Miyake or have ruled this district '-in such
cases, ye, the Governors, must not readily make application to
the Court in acquiescence in such fictions, but must ascertain
particularly the true facts before making your report.
   Moreover on waste pieces of ground let arsenals be erected,
and let the swords and armour, with the bows and arrows of
the provinces and districts, be deposited together in them. In
the case of the frontier provinces which border close on the
Yemishi, let all the weapons be mustered together, and let
them remain in the hands of their original owners. I n regard
to the six districts of the province of Yamato, let the officials
who are sent there prepare registers of the population, and
also take an account of the acreage of cultivated land.
        This means to examine the acreage of the cultivated
     ground, and the numbers, houses, and ages of the people.
   Ye Governors of provinces, take careful note of this and
withdraw." 2 Accordingly presents \vere made them of silk and
cloth, which varied in the case of each person.
   This day a bell and box \vere provided in the Court. 3 The XX\T. 9.
  1   Li t. name.
  2  It would seem that at this tilne there was a reorganization of the local
governments, giving a more centralized character to the administration
temporary Governors superseding in some measure the hereditary titular
officials. No clear account is given of this change, but it seen1S plainly to
be inferred fronl the above passage. Kokushi, ~ p.l, are not no\\" men-
tioned for the first time, and it is clear that the change \vas not nlade all at
oncc. The similar change from the Daimio system to that of local prefec-
tures in 1868 \\'ill occur to the reader.
   3 The box 'was for the purpose of receiving petitions and complaints, like

the Me-yasu-bako of later times. This custoln was derived from China.
See Florenz's note.
         202                          NIHONGI.

         Emperor issued an order, saying :-" If there be a complainant,
         in case the person in question belongs to a Torno no Miyakko,
         let the Torno no Miyakko first make inquiry and then report to
         Us. In case the person in question has an elder/ let the elder
         first make inquiry and then report to Us. If, however, the
         Torno no Miyakko or the elder does not come to a clear
         decision respecting the complaint, let a document be received
         and placed in the box, and punishment will be inflicted
         according to the offence. The person who receives the docu-
         ment should at dawn take it and make report to the Inner
         Palace, when We will mark on it the year and month, and com-
         municate it to the Ministers. In case there is any neglect to
         decide it, or if there are malpractices on the part of intriguing
         persons, let the complainant strike the bell. This is why the
         bell is hung and box provided in the Court. Let the people of
         the Empire know and appreciate Our intention.
            Moreover the law of men and women shall be that the children
         born of a free man and a free woman shall belong to the father:
         if a free man takes to wife a slave woman, her children shall
         belong to the mother: if a free woman marries a slave man, the
         children of the marriage shall belong to the father; if they are
         slaves of two houses, the children shall belong to the mother.
         The children of temple serfs shall follow the rule for freemen.
          But in regard to others who become slaves, they shall be
         treated according to the rule for slaves. Do ye now publish
         this well to the people as a beginning of regulations." 2
            8th day. A messenger was sent to the Great Temple 3 to
XXV. 10. summon together the Buddhist priests and nuns, and to address
         them on the part of the Emperor, saying :-" In the I3th year
         of the reign of the Emperor'; who ruled the world in the
         Palace of Shikishima, King Myong of Pekche reverently trans-
         mitted the Law of Buddha to our great Yamato. At this time
         the Ministers in a body were opposed to its transmission.
         Only Soga no Iname no Sukune believed in this Law, and the
         Emperor accordingly instructed him to receive it with reverence.
         In the reign of the Emperor who ruled the world in the Palace
           1 The senior Inember of his fanlily.
           2 The first exan1ple of what we should call legislation. Compare the
         so-called laws of Shotoku Daishi above, A.D. 604-
           3 Kudara Temple.                             4 Kimnlei Tenno.
                                  KOTOKU.                                   2°3
 of Wosada,t Soga no Mumako no Sukune, influenced by
 reverence for his deceased father, continued to prize highly the
 doctrines of Buddha.' But the other Ministers had no faith
 in it, and its institutes had almost perished when the Emperor
 instructed Mumako no Sukune reverently to receive this La\v.
 In the reign of the Empress who ruled the world in the Palace
 of W oharida,:~ M iimako no Sukune, on behalf of the Empress,
 made an embroidered figure of Buddha sixteen feet high and
a copper image of Buddha sixteen feet high. He exalted the
doctrine of Buddha and showed honour to its priests and nuns.
I t is Our desire anew to exalt the pure doctrine and brilliantly
to promulgate great principles. We therefore appoint as
professors the following ten persons:-The S'ramana, Pok-
 nyang, Rye-un, Syang-an, Nyong-un, and Rye-chi, Taihushi 4
of Koma, and Sobin, Dato, Yerin, Yemyu and Yean, chief
priests of temples.& We separately appoint the Hoshi, Yemyo, xxv. II.
chief priest of the Temple of Kudara.
    Let these ten professors well instruct the priests in general
in the practice of the teachings of Shaka. It is needful that
they be made to comply with the La\v. If there is a difficulty
about repairing Temples built by any from the Emperor down
to the Torno no Miyakko, We will in all cases assist in doing
so. We shall also cause Temple Commissioners and Chief
Priests to be appointed, who shall make a circuit to all the
temples, and having ascertained the actual facts respecting the
priests and nuns, their male and female slaves, and the acreage
of their cultivated lands, report all the particulars clearly
to us."
    Accordingly Kume no Omi, Miwa no Shikobu no Kimi,
and Ohi, Nukadabe no Muraji, were appointed Huto. 6
   9 th month, 1St day. Officials were sent on a mission to all
the provinces to regulate the matter of weapons.
         One book says :-" From the 6th to the 9th month

  1 Bindatsu ~renno.

  2 No-jin, fig {:,"     he \vho can produce benevolence," i.e. Sakyalnuni.
  3 Suiko l'enn6.                     4 A rank in the Buddhist priesthood.

  5 I give the last five names the Japanese pronunciation.    But SOlne of thenl
may haye been Careans. Some editions make" chief priests of temples"
part of the original commentary.
  6 i.e. Heads of the La\v.     See above, XXII. 38.
         2°4                           NIHONGI.

              messengers were sent to the provinces of the four quarters
              to collect weapons of all kinds."
           3rd day. The Imperial Prince Furubito, I<.ahahari, Saga no
         Taguchi no ami, Shihimi, Mononobe no Yenowi no Muraji,
         Shidaru, Kibi no Kasa no Omi, Maro, Yalnato no Aya no furni
         no Atahe, and Takutsu, Yechi no Hada no Miyakko, plotted
         rebellion.
                 One book says :-" The Heir Apparent Furubita." One
              book says :-" Furubito no Ohoye." This Imperial Prince
              repaired to the mountains of Yoshino, and he is therefore
xxv. 12.       sometimes styled the Heir Apparent of Yoshino.
           12th day. Shidaru, Yoshino no Kasa no Omi, surrendered
         himself to Naka no Ohoye, saying :-" The Imperial Prince
         Yoshino no Furubito and Kahahori, Saga no Taguchi no Omi,
         etc., having plotted rebellion, thy servant became an accom-
         plice of their party."
                 One book says :-" Shidaru, Kibi no Kasa no Omi, told
               Abe no Oho-omi and Saga no Oho-omi that he was an
               accomplice of the band of rebels of the Imperial Prince of
               Yoshino, and that he therefore no\v surrendered himself."
            Naka no Ohoye straightway sent Uda no Yenomuro no Furu
         and !{oma no Miyachi with a considerable foree to attack the
         Imperial Prince Furubito no Ohoye and his companions.
                 One book says :-" 11th month, 30th da:y. Naka no
               Ohoye sent Abe, Kosobe no Omi, and Sahekibe no !{omaro,
               these two, with a force of thirty men to attack Furubito no
               Ohoye. They slew Furubito no Ohoye and his children.
               His consorts strangled themselves." One book says:-
               " 11th month. Prince Yoshino no Ohoye plotted rebellion,
               but the matter having become public, he was executed. H
            19th day. Commissioners were sent to all the provinces to
         take a record of the total numbers of the people. The
         Emperor on this occasion made an edict, as follo\vs : -
            " In the times of all the Emperors, from antiquity down-
         wards, subjects have been set apart for the purpose of making
         notable their reigns and handing down their names to posterity. 1
         Now the Omi and lVluraji, the Torno no Miyakko and the
         Runi no Miyakko, have each one set apart their own vassals,
           1 The reference is to the institution of Be with names commemorative of

         the reign.
                               KOTOKU.                                 2°5
\vhom they compel to labour at their arbitrary pleasure.
Moreover the~y cut off the hills and seas, the \voods and plains,
the ponds and rice-fields belonging to the provinces and
districts, and appropriate them to themselves. Their contests
are never-ceasing. Some engross to themselves many tens of
thousands of shiro 1 of rice-land, while others possess in all
patches of ground too small to stick a needle into. When
the time cowes for the payment of taxes, the Omi, the Muraji, XX\'.13·
and the Torno no Miyakko, first collect them for themselves
and then hand over a share. In the case of repairs to palaces
or the construction of misasagi, they each bring their own
vassals, and do the work according to circumstances. The
Book of Changes says :-" Diminish that which is above:
increase that which is bela",: if measures are framed according
to the regulations, the resources (of the State) suffer no injury,
and the people receive no hurt." ~
   " At the present time, the people are still few. And )'et the
powerful cut off portions of land and water,3 and converting
them into private ground, sell it to the people, demanding the
price yearly. From this time forward the sale 4 of land is not
allo"'''ed. Let no man without due authority make himself a
landlord, engrossing to himself that \"hich belongs to the
helpless. "
   The people \\Tere greatly rejoiced.
   \Vinter, 12th month, 9th day. The Emperor removed the
capital to Toyosaki in Nagaraat Naniha. Old people, remark·
ing upon this to one another, said :-" The movement of rats
towards Naniha from spring until summer was an omen of the
removal of the capital." a
   24th day. It was reported from the land of Koshi :-" Drift-
wood of the sea shore passed away towards the east, leaving
an impression on the sand like a ploughed rice-field in
appearance. "
   This year ,vas the year Kinoto Mi (42nd) of the Cycle.

  1  A land ll1easure of IS' 13 acres.
  :! Vide Legge's ~'y"ih-King," pp. ~47 and 26~.
  :; i.e. rice ground and other cultivated land.
  .. By sale is evidently Ineant letting. An early exalnple of a " Land Act.
  ;) A similar story is related in Chinese History (in the Wei dynasty) of
rats indicating a change of capital by their Inovenlents.
   VOL. II.                                                       P
           206                                  NIHONGI.

xxv.
  xxv.       2nd year, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. As soon as the
           ceremonies of the new year's congratulations were over, the
           Emperor promulgated an edict of reforms, as follows : -
             "I. Let the people established by the ancient Emperors, etc.,
           as representatives of children be abolished, also the ~1iyake of
xxv. 14.   various places and the people owned as serfs by the Wake, 1 the
           Omi, the Muraji, the Torno no Miyakko, the Kuni no ~fiyakko
           and the Mura no Obito. 2 Let the farmsteads 3 in various
           places be abolished." Consequently fiefs were granted for
           their sustenance 4 to tnose of the rank of Daibu and upwards
           on a descending scale. 5 Presents of cloth and silk stuffs were
           given to the officials arid people, varying in value.
              "Further \Ve say. It is the business of the Daibu to govern
                                                the people. If they discharge
                                                this duty thoroughly, the
                                                people have trust in them,
                                                and an increase of their
                                                revenue is therefore for the
                                                good of the people.
                                                   II. The capital is for the
                                                first time to be regulated, and~
                                                Governors appointed for the
                                                Home provinces and districts.
                                                Let barriers, outposts,guards,
                                                and post-horses, both special
                        Bell-token.
                                                and ordinary, be provided,
           bell-tokens made, and mountains and rivers regulated.;
                      6




             1   See above, Vol. I. p. 19 2 •             2 Chief men of villages.

             a Of serfs.                           4Instead of the serfs taken from thenl.
              5 The" Roku-rei " gives a scale of sustenance-fiefs at a later period.    A
           Prime Minister had 3000 houses, a Junior Prime Minister 2000, a Dainagon
           800, etc., etc. These fiefs \"ere hereditary.
              6 I was at first disposed to regard the bells and tokens as different

           objects, but no\v agree \vith Dr. Florenz that they are the same. They
           .vere small globular bells, sometinles single, sometinles in groups as in
           the illustration, and indicated by their shape and number how many
           horses the bearer \vas entitled to. This institution \vas borrowed fronl
           China.
             7 By the regulation of mountains and rivers is meant the provision of
           guards at ferries and nlountain passes \vhich serve as boundaries between
           different provinces.
                               KOTOKU.                                 2°7
    For each ward in the capital let there be appointed one
alderman/ and for four wards one chief alderman,2 who shall xxv. 15·
be charged with the superintendence of the population, and
the examination of criminal matters. For appointment as
chief aldermen of wards let men be taken belonging to the
wards, of unblemished character, firm and upright, so that
they may fitly sustain the duties of the time. For appoint-
ments as aldermen, \vhether of rural townships or of city wards,
let ordinary subjects be taken belonging to the to\vnship or
ward, of good character and solid capacity. If such men are
not to be found in the township or ward in question, it is
permitted to select and employ men of the adjoining township
or ward.
    The Home provinces shall include the region from the
 River Yokogaha at Nabari ~ on the east, from Mount Senoyama
 in Kii on the south, from Kushibuchi in Akashi on the west, and
 from Mount Afusaka-yama in Sasanami in Afumi on the north.
 Districts of forty townships -l are constituted Greater Districts,
 of from thirty to four townships are constituted Middle Districts,
 and of three or fewer townships are constituted Lesser Districts.
 For the district authorities, of whatever class, let there be xxv. 16.
 taken Kuni no Miyakko of unblemished character, such as
 may fitly sustain the duties of the time, and made Tairei and
 Shorei.[) Let men of solid capacity and intelligence who are
 skilled in writing and arithmetic be appointed assistants and
 clerks.
     The number of special or ordinary post-horses given shall in
 all cases follow the number of marks on the posting bell-tokens.
 When bell-tokens are given to (officials of) the provinces and
  barriers, let them be held in both cases by the chief official, or
  in his absence by the assistant official.
     III. Let there now be provided for the first time registers of

   1  The interlinear gloss is ':VOSll, or chief.
   2  1'he interlinear gloss is Ul11~(asJli, one \vho demands.
   3 In Iga.

   • me A ri or sato consisted of 50 houses.
   & Greater and Lesser Governors.           These terms are rendered Kori no
 Miyakko and Suke no Miyakko in the interlinear glosses. But I have little
 doubt that the Chinese words are intended, and that these are lnere trans-
 lations, and not the real titles of these officials.
          208                               NIHONGI.

          population, books of account and a system of the receipt and
          re-granting of distribution-land. 1
xxv. 17·     Let every fifty houses be reckoned a township, and in every
          township let there be one alderman who shall be charged with
          the superintendence of the population,2 the direction of the
          so\ving of crops and the cultivation of mulberry trees, the pre-
          vention and examination of offences, and the enforcement of the
          paynlent of taxes and of forced labour.
            For rice-land, thirty paces in length by twelve paces in
         breadth shall be reckoned a tan.3 Ten tan make one cho.
         For each tan the tax is two sheaves and two bundles (such as
xxv. 18. can be grasped in the hand) of rice; for each chB the tax is
         twent)t-two sheaves of rice. On mountains or in valleys where
         the land is precipitous, or in remote places where the population
         is scanty', such arrangements are to be made as may be con-
          venient. 4
            IV. The old taxes and forced labour are abolished, and a
         s)rstem of commuted taxes instituted. These shall consist of
         fine silks, coarse silks, raw silk, and floss silk,6 all in accordance
         \vith what is produced in the locality. For each chu of rice-
         land the rate is one rod 6 of fine silk, or for four chi) one piece
         forty feet in length by" two and a half feet in \vidth. For coarse
         silk the rate is t\VQ rods (per chB), or one piece for every two
xxv. 19. chu of the same length and width as the fine silk. For cloth
             1 The DelZryo (Land Regulations) says, "In granting Ko-bun-den (land

         shared in proportion to population) 11len shall have t\VO tan, ,vornen a third
         less, and children under fiye years of age none. Lands are granted for a term
         of six years." This seenlS to point to a general redistribution of lands once
         in six years, sonlething after the 11lanner still practised in Russia.
            2 i .(i. of the registers of population.

            :s Allo\ving five feet to the pace, this \\'ould make the tan 9000 square feet.
         The Japanese foot is not very different from our own. The present tan is
         10,800 square feet.       The interlinear gloss of f~ is kida; but I aln strongly
         inclined to think that the Chinese w'ord tan is here intended.
            4 The "Shiikai" editor brings in this last sentence at the end of the

         previous paragraph. It would then apply to the appointment of rural
         aldermen. The old reading is better.
           [) The" Shiikai" adds .1fj, or cloth, by \vhich is meant fabrics of hen1p or
         of the fibre of the inner bark of the paper mulberry. Textiles served the
         purpose of currency in this period, so that this commutation \vas in the nature
         of a substitution of payment in lnoney for payment in rice.
           6 Ten feet.
                                 KOTOKU.                                  209

the rate is four rods of the same dimensions as the fine and
coarse silk, i.e. one tan 1 for each cho. [N a rates of weight
are an~y\vhere given for silk or floss silk.] Let there be levied
separately a commuted house tax.::! All houses shall pay each
one rod and t\VO feet of cloth. The extra articles of this tax,
as ,veIl as salt and offerings,~ \vill depend on what is produced
in the locality. For horses for the public service, let ever~y
hundred houses contribute one horse of medium quality. Or
if the horse is of superior quality, let one be contributed by
e\"er~y t\VO hundred houses.    If the horses have to be purchased,
the price shall be made up by a payment from each house of
one rod and two feet of cloth. As to weapons, each person
shall contribute a sword, armour, bow and arrows, a flag, and a
drum. For coolies, the old s)"stem, by which one coolie was
provided by every thirty houses, is altered, and one coolie is to
be furnished from every fifty houses [one is for employment as
a menial servant] for allotment to the various functionaries.
Fifty houses shall be allotted to provide rations for one coolie,
and one house shall contribute two rods and two feet of cloth
and five masu 4 of rice in lieu of service.
   For waiting-women in the Palace, 5 let there be furnished the XX\T. 20.
sisters or daughters of district officials of the rank of Shorei or
upwards-goad-looking women [with one male and two female
servants to attend on them J, and let 100 houses be allotted to
provide rations for one waiting-woman. The cloth and rice
supplied in lieu of service shall, in every case, follow the same
rule as for coolies." 6
   In this month the Emperor occupied the separate Palace of
Koshiro. He sent messengers to command the provinces and
districts to repair the arsenals. Yemishi came and did
homage.
         One book sa~ys :-" The Miyake of Koshiro, in the village

  1   There are t\VO tan to the hiki or piece, \vhich now Incasures about
2I-! yards.
  ~ The Chinese is AIM, rendered in Japanese by mitsugi, or tribute.      Here
it seeins to exclude the rice-tax, but to include various Iniscellaneous taxes.
    3 Or" salted articles of food for the Elnperor's table."

    4 Or sh6 = 109 cubic inches.                          5 Uneme.

   '6 For an account of the 1110dern systenl of taxation in Japan the reader is

referred to a paper in the" T.A.S.] .,:' Vol. XX., Supplement, p. 12 I.
                210                             NIHONGI.

                     of Sayabe, at Naniha, was pulled down, and a temporary
                     Palace erected.:'
                   2nd month, 15th day. The Emperor proceeded to the
                 Eastern Gate of the Palace, where, by Saga, Oho-omi of the
                 Right, I he decreed as follows : -
                   "The God Incarnate, the Emperor Yamato-neko,2 ,vho rules
                the world, gives command to the Ministers assembled in
                his presence, to the Omi, Muraji, Runi no Miyakko, Torno no
                Miyakko, and subjects of various classes, saying:-
                   'We are informed that wise rulers of the people hung a bell
                at their gate, and so took cognizance of the con1plaints of their
                subjects; they erected buildings in the thoroughfares, where
                they listened to the censures of the passers-b~y. Even the
                opinions of the grass and fire\\TOod gatherers;{ they inquired
                personally and used for their guidance. We therefore, on a
                former occasion, made an edict, saying :-" In ancient times
                the Empire was ruled by having at the Court flags of honour
                for the encouragement of good, and a board of censur-e, the
                object being to diffuse principles of Government and to invite
                remonstrances." All this served widely to ascertain the opinions
X,,'{V.   21.   of those below. Kwan-Tsze 4 said :-" The Emperor Hwang,
                by establishing the Conferences of the Bright Hall,' observed
                the opinions of the wise on the upper hand, while the Emperor
                Yao, having the inquiries of the street-houses, listened to the
                people on the lower hand. Shun again had flags to proclaim
                merit and thus secure publicity; and Yii set up a drum at his
                  1  Or we should perhaps construe Udaijin.
                  2  This title is found in the Japanese names of the ancient Emperors
                Korei and his two successors. I t also occurs in the Japanese nanles of the
                Empresses Gemmei and Gensh6 in the early part of the eighth century.
                Here Yamato-neko is used by the Emperor hilnself, although it \vas no part
                of his name. I t would appear therefore that it had becolue, to some extent,
                a COlUluon name, like Pharaoh or Ccesar.
                  3 Vide Legge's " Shiking," p. 501.    The ancients had a saying, " Consult
                the grass and firewood gatherers." This is the equivalent of our" Man in
                the street."
                  4 One of the most reno\vlled statesmen of Chinese antiquity.      Died B.C.
                645. Vide Mayers' "Chinese Manual," p. 91. The quotation is by no means
                accurate.
                  l) As this is purely legendary, it is useless to inquire the nature of the

                institution in question. The term Bright Hall, or l\1eido, is no\v applied to
                the Imperial University in Japan.
                            KOTOKU.                            211

Court, thus providing for the investigation into expectations.
T'ang 1 had the Court of the general control of Districts,
whereby he observed the faults of the people. King Wu 2 had
the park of the Spirit terrace, and therefore the wise had
advancement.      Thus the sage Emperor and Illustrious
Sovereigns of antiquity possessed and did not lose; they
gained and did not destroy·."
   The object of hanging up a bell, of providing a box, and of
appointing a man to receive petitions, is to make those \vho
have grievances or remonstrances deposit their petitions in the
box. The receivers of petitions are commanded to make their
report to Us every morning. When We receive this report We
shall dra\v the attention of the Ministers to it, and cause them
to consider it, and We trust that this may be done without
delay. But if there should be neglect on the part of the xxv. 22.
Ministers, and a want of diligence or partizan intrigues, and if
\Ve, moreover, should refuse to listen to remonstrance, let the
complainant strike the bell. There has been already an
Imperial command to this effect. But some time afterwards
there was a man of intelligence and uprightness who, cherish-
ing in his heart the spirit of a national patriot, addressed Usa
memorial of earnest remonstrance, which he placed in the box
prepared for the purpose. We therefore now publish it to the
black-haired people here assembled. This memorial runs as
follows :-" Those subjects who come to the capital in con-
nection with the discharge of their duty to the Government of
the Country, are detained by the various public functionaries and
put to forced labour of various kinds, etc., etc." We are still
moved with strong sympathy by this. Ho\v could the people
expect that things would come to this? Now no long time has
elapsed since the capital was removed, so that so far from being
at home, we are, as it were, strangers. It is therefore impossible
to avoid employing the people, and they have therefore been,
against Our will, compelled to labour. As often as Our minds
dwell on this We have never been able to sleep in peace.
When We saw this memorial we could not refrain from a joyous
exclamation. \Ve have accordingly complied with the language
 1 Founder of the Shang Dynasty in China, 13.C. 1766.
 2 The founder of the Chow Dynasty, B.C. 1169-1 I 16.   17ide Mayers
" Handbook," p. 264.
         212                                NIl-IONGI.

         of remonstrance, and have put a stop to the forced services at
         various places.
            In a former edict, \Ve said :-" Let the man \\,ho remonstrates
         sign his name." Those who disobey this injunction are doubt-
         less actuated by a wish to serve their country, and not by a
         desire of personal gain. Whether a man signs his name or not,
         let him not fail to ren10nstrate with Us on Our neglect or
         forgetfulness.' " 1
            Another edict was made as follows :-" There are many'
         things of which the assembled people of the land complain ..
         'Ve are now about to explain our principles. Listen attentively
         to \\yhat We say. Those who come to the capital and assemble
         at Court in order to obtain decisions of doubtful points, should
         not disperse in the morning,2 but remain together in attendance
         at Court. n
            Koryo, Pekche, Imna, and Silla all together sent enVO)TS to
         offer tribute.
            22nd day. The Emperor returned from the detached
         Palace of Koshiro.
            3rd month, 2nd day. An edict was issued to the Governors
         of the Eastern provinces, saying :-" Do all ye Ministers and
         Daibu assembled in attendance on Us, as well as ye Omi,.
         Muraji, Kuni no Miyakko, and Torno no Miyakko, and also ye
         subjects of every class, listen to this :-He that is lord between
xxv. 23. Heaven and Earth and rules the myriad people ought not to
         exercise control alone: he must have Ministers to support him.
         From generation to generation, therefore, Our Imperial
         ancestors have governed along with the ancestors of you, My
         Ministers. I t is Our \vish also, with the protecting power of
         the Gods, to associate you with Ourselves in the government..
         'Ve therefore, on a former occasion, appointed Daibu, of good
         family, to the governlneht of the eight Eastern provinces.
         Then the Governors went to their posts. Six obeyed the laws,
         and two \vere regardless of OUf commands. In each case
         censure or praise became audible. We thereupon commended
         those who kept the law, and were severe with those who dis-
         regarded the instructions given them. He that would be a
         ruler, whether he be Lord or Minister, should first correct
           1   This is a difficult passage; Dr. Florenz renders it somewhat differently..
           ~ The interlinear Kana has shibaraku, "for a while."
                                KOTOI(U.                                 212


himself, and then correct others. If he do not correct himself,
how shall he be able to correct others? 1 He therefore who
does not correct himself, be he Lord or be he Minister, \vill
meet with calamity. Should one not be watchful? If ye, the
leaders, are upright, who shall presume to be other\vise? Do
ye now be guided by Our former commands in dispensing your
judgments."
   19th day. The Emperor made a decree to the Chushushi ~
of the Eastern provinces, saying : -
   " Hear this, all ye Ministers and Daibu assembled in Our
presence, as well as ye Kuni no 1vIiyakko and Torno no Miyakko,
together with the subjects of all classes! In the 8th month of
last year, We in person admonished you, saying :-' Do not
use your official authority to appropriate public or private
property: you should consume food of your o\vn domain, and
ride horses of your own domain. Those \vho disregard this
admonition, if of the rank of Assistant Governor or higher,
shall be degraded in official rank, if of the rank of Clerk or lower,
 shall be sentenced to flogging. Those \\Tho convert property
to their own use shall be mulcted in double its value.' Such
,vas the edict which We issued. Now, \\Then We inquired
from the Chushushi and the Miyakko of the various provinces
 whether the local Governors, \vhen they proceeded to their
 posts, attended to this admonition or not, the Chushushi and xxv. 24-
 the others informed Us fully of the facts, to wit : -The offence
 of Kuhi, Hodzumi no ami, consists in having made exactions
 from each family among the people, and though he repented
 and gave back the things, not doing so completely. His two
 assistants, Fuse no Omi and Shidamu, Kose no Omi, have
 offended by not correcting the error of their chief, etc., etc.
 The inferior 0fficials have all been guilty of offences. The
 offence of Kose no Tokune no Omi consists in having made
 exactions from each famil~y among the people, and though he
 repented and returned the things, not doing so completely.
  He has moreover taken awa}~ the horses of the agricultural

  1 See Legge's " Chinese Classics," Vol. I. p. 221.
  ~ The institutes of the
                        T'hang dynasty define Choshushi (court·asselnble-
messenger) as persons sent to the capital bearing tribute froln the provinces.
Here they seeln to have been officials who reported on the conduct of the
local officials.
         21 4                            NIHONGI.

         serfs. His t\VO assistants, Yenowi no Muraji and Oshizaka no
         Muraji, did not correct the faults of their chief, but on the
         contrary joined with him in prosecuting their own advantage.
         They have moreover taken away horses belonging to the Kuni
         no Miyakko Sumi, Utena no Atahe, although at first he
         remonstrated with his chief, yet at last became corrupt along
         with him. The inferior officials are all guilty of offences. The
         offence of Ki no Marikida no Omi consists in having sent men
         to Asakura no Kimi and Winouhe t no Kimi to fetch their
         horses for him to look at. Further, he made Asakura no Kimi
         manufacture swords. Further, he got from Asakura no Kimi
         his bow-cloth. 2 Further, he did not honestly return to their
         owners the articles sent by the Runi no Miyakko in lieu of
         weapons, but delivered them to the Kuni no Miyakko in an
         irregular manner.~ Further, in the province committed to his
         charge, he allowed himself to be robbed of a sword. Further, in
xxv. 25. the provinceofYamato he allowed himself to be robbed of a sword.
         These are the offences of Ki no Omi and of his assistants,
         Oho-guchi, Miwa no Kimi, and Momoyori, Kahabe no Omi.
         Their subordinate officials, Shihatsu, Kahabe no Omi, Tajihi no
         Fukame, Mozu no Nagaye, Katsuraki no Saigusa, Naniha no
         Kuhikame, Inukahi no Isogimi, ~Iaro, Iki no Fubito, Tajihi- no
          Inume 4-these eight persons, all are guilty of offences. The
         offence of Adzumi no Muraji consists in this-that when
         Wadoku no Fubito was ill, he caused the Kuni no Miyakko to
         send (him?) government property. Further, he took horses
         belonging to the Yube. 5 The offence of his assistant Momoyori,

           1   Now pronounced Inouye.
           2   The meaning of this phrase is not quite clear. Cloth was the money of
         the period, and perhaps the bo\v-cloth was by way of cOlnmutation for bows
         to be furnished, or an allo\vance for making bo\vs. Or it may have been
         one of the articles referred to in the next clause as deposited with the local
         authorities as a security for arms lent out.
           S The" Shukai" editor's rendering is--" reported falsely to the Kuni no

         Miyakko that they had done so."
            -I It may be observed that the higher ranks of the local authorities seem

         to have been filled from the old nobility. Most of the subordinates, as
         appears frolll this passage, had no titles, only a personal name and a name
         indicative of the locality of their birth or residence.
            5 The Yube was originally a Be for the purpose of providing hot baths

         for SOlne Elnperor or Prince. This term \\'as also applied to the village \vhere
                             KOTOKU.                              21 5

Kashihade no ami, consists in his having received and stored
in his house articles paid in lieu of hay. Further, he took the
horses of the Kuni no Miyakko and exchanged them for others.
Thet\vo brothers, Ihatsutsll and Yumaro, Kahabeno Omi,l have
also been guilty of offences. Ohochi no Muraji's offence
consists in his having disobeyed aUf former decree, which- w-as
as follows :-' Let not the local Governors personally judge the xxv. 26.
plaints of the people in the districts placed under their charge.'
 He has disobeyed this edict in that he has taken it upon himself
personally to judge the plaints of the men of U do, and the matter
of the slaves of Nakatomi no Taka. Nakatomi no Taka is
equally guilty with him in this matter. The offence of Kishida
no Omi consists in his having had his official sword ~tolen
when he was in the province of Yamato. This showed a want
of circumspection. As for Womidori no Omi and Tamba no
Omi, they llave been simply incompetent, but not guilty of
any offence. The two men, Imbe no Konomi and Mutsuki,2
Nakatomi no Muraji, have also been guilty of offences.
Neither of these two men, viz., Hada no Omi and Taguchi no
Omi, have committed any offence. The offence of Heguri no
Omi consists in his having neglected to investigate the plaints
of the men of Mikuni. Upon a review of these facts we find
that all this is owing to the neglect and incompetence of you
three, viz. Ki no Mariki no Omi, Kose no Tokune no Omi and
Hodzumi no Kuhi no Omi. Is it not painful to Us to think of
your disobedience to OUf edict? No\v if he who has pastoral
care of the people, whether as Lord or Minister, gives a
personal example of upright conduct, \\~ho shall presume to do
otherwise? But if he, whether Lord or Minister, be not
upright in heart, it is fit that he should bear the guilt. What
avails it to repent afterwards? We shall therefore consider
the cases of all these local Governors and punish them
according to the gravity of their offences.
  With regard moreover to the Kuni no Miyakko who have
disobeyed Our edict by sending presents to the Governors of
their provinces, and, at length joining with them in the

the serfs of the Be lived, and subsequently became a mere proper name.
It is not easy to decide in which application it is here used.
   1 l~oth had the title Kahabe no Omi

   ~ This name has the curious signification of 1St tnonth.
         216                         N'IIIONGI.

         pursuit of gain, constantly conceive foul wickedness, repressive
         measures are indispensable. But although such are OUf
         thoughts, we have only begun to occupy our new palace, and
         are about to make offerings to all the Rami, both which
xxv. 27. matters belong to the present year. Moreover it is not meet
         to employ the people in labour during the months of
         agriculture. But in connection with the building of a new
         palace, it was decidedly impossible to avoid doing so. Deeply
         conscious of both these considerations, We proclaim a general
         amnesty throughout the Empire. From this time forward, let
         the local Governors of provinces and districts be zealous and
         do their utmost. Let them avoid profligacy. Let messengers
         be sent to release all banished men of the various provinces,
         and all prisoners in the gaols vvithout exception.
            In contradistinction from the rest, the following six men, viz.
         Shihoya no Konoshiro,l Kamikozo 2 no Saigusa,3 Asakura no
         Kimi, Mariko no Muraji, Mikaha no Oho-tomo no Atahe and
         Suzuki wo no Atahe, have been obedient to the Emperor. We
         profoundly commend their sentiments.
            Let the official rice-fields belonging to the public offices in
         various places be done away with, as well as the lent-rice 4 in
         various places belonging to the Ku-so-bu Kibishima a and let
         her official rice-lands be distributed among all OUf Ministers
         and Torno no Miyakko. Moreover, let rice-land and hill-
XXV. 28. tracts 6 be given to those temples which are omitted from the
         registers. "
            20th day. The Prince Imperial, by a messenger, addressed
         a petition to the Emperor, saying :-" In the reigns of the
         former Enlperors, they treated the Empire as a whole, and so
         ruled it. But, when we come to the present time, there was
         division and separation, to the injury of the Work [the work
         of the State is meantJ. Now that it has devolved on the
          Emperor our Sovereign to have pastoral charge of the myriad
         people, Heaven and Man respond harmoniously to each other,

           1 Shihoya l11eans salt-house; Konoshiro is the nalne of a kind of
         herring.
           2 Shinto shrine.                            3 Herb of luck.

           tl Lent out to the peasants at seed-time, to be returned at harvest.

           a The Empress Dowager.· She died A.D. 643.
           6 Not arable land.
                                KOTOKU.                                  2lj

and the government has been reformed. l I, therefore, filled
with joy and veneration, place it on my head,~ and prostrating
myself, address Your Majesty :-' The Emperor who now rules
the Land of the Eight Islands as an Incarnate Deity inquired
of thy servant, saying :-" Should the Koshiro no Iribe in the
possession of ~,finisters, Muraji, Torno no l\tliyakko, Runi no
Miyakko, and established in the days of former Emperors, the
Mina no Iribe in the private possession of Imperial Princes, and
the Mina no Iribe belonging to the Imperial f'ather 3 Ohoye
 [Hikobito Ohoye is meant], as well as their l'vliyake, be allowed
to remain the same as in former generations, or not? "-! Thy
servant having received this command with reverence, replies
respectfully, saying :-" In Heaven there are not two suns: in
a country there are not two rulers. It is therefore the Emperor
alone who is supreme over all the Empire, and who has a right
to the services of the myriad people.            Make a special
selection of labourers from the Iribe and from the people
granted in fee, and follow the fornler arrangement.& For the
rest/ it may be feared that they will be put to forced labour on
private authority.    I therefore offer to the Emperor 524 men of
the Iribe, and 181 Miyake."'"
   22nd day. The Emperor made a decree, as follows :-" We xxv. 29.
are informed that a Prince of the Western Land 7 admonished
his people, saying: -' Those who made interments in ancient
times resorted to a high ground ,vhich they formed into a
tomb. They did not pile up a mound, nor did they plant

  1   This is the same term (i-shin) as is used of the revolution of 1868.
  2   This is a figurative expression of his respect for the reforlued Govern-
lnent. At this day a Japanese often- puts a present to his head in token of
thanks.
   :i Father of Jomei Tenno.

   4 Ko-shiro lueans literally" equivalent of children."  The Koshiro no Iribe
seenl to have been comn1unities of serfs (be) instituted (1ri) by persons who
 had no children, to perpetuate their name. This practice is frequently
mentioned above. Mina nleans august natue, and the Mina no Iribe were
apparently siInilar comll1unities instituted to perpetuate an Emperor's (or
En1press's) name. Vide also Chaluberlain's "Kojiki/' pp. 186, 197, 268,
 269, etc.
   5 See above, XXV. 19.

   6 Others than Iribe and people granted in fee.

   r i.e. China.
         218                            N IIiONGI.
         trees. 1 The inner and outer coffin were merely enough to
         last till the bones decayed, the shroud was merely sufficient
         to last till the flesh decayed. I shall therefore cultivate 2 the
         unproductive pieces of land occupied by these tombs, to the
         end that their place may be forgotten after changing genera-
         tions. Deposit not in them gold or silver or copper or iron,
         and let earthenware objects alone represent the clay chariots
         and straw figures 3 of antiquity. Let the interstices of the
         coffin be varnished. I~et the offerings consist of rice pre-
         sented three times, and let not pearls or jewels be placed
         in the mouth of the deceased. Besto\v not jewel-shirts or
         jade armour. All these things are practices of the unenlight-
         ened vulgar.' Again it is said :-' Burial is putting away,
         and proceeds from the desire to prevent the dead from being
         seen by people.' Of late, the poverty of our people is abso-
xxv. 30. lutely owing to the construction of tombs. 4 We now issue
         regulations making distinction of noble and mean.
            The inner dimensions of tombs of persons of the rank of
         Princes and upwards 5 shall be nine feet in length by five in
         width. Their outer limits shall be nine fathoms square
         and their height five fathoms. 6 The work shall be completed
         by 1000 labourers in seven days. At the time of interment
         white cloth shall be used for the hangings (of the bier), etc.
         A hearse may be used.
            The inner dimensions of tombs of Superior Ministers 7
         shall be similar in length, breadth and height to the above.

           1 The trees planted were evergreens, viz. the fir and cryptomeria, for the

         saIne reasons as make the yew to be considered a proper c~lurchyard tree
         in this country.
           "When the ancients buried their dead, they covered the body thickly
         with pieces of \"ood, having laid it in the open country. They raised no
         mound over it, nor planted trees around."-Legge's " Yih-King," p. 308.
                                                if.
           2 The " Shiikai ~, has §fa in error for             3 See Vol. 1. p. 18 I.

           " It must be remembered that some of these \vere of enormous size.
         Vide Chanlberlain's "Things Japanese," 2nd Ed. p. 27. Also above,
         Vall. p. 135.
           {) This does not apply to Imperial tombs.
           6 The height is probably measured along the slope, not perpendicularly.

         The fatho111 is now of about five feet, but may have been more in those
         days.
           7 i.e. Oho-omi, says the" Shiikai 'J editor.
                                KOTOKU.                                 212


Their outer limits shall be seven fathoms square, and th~y
shall be three fathoms in height.! The work shall be com-
pleted by 500 labourers in five days. At the time of interment
white cloth shall be used for the hangings of the bier, which
shall be borne on men's shoulders.
   The inner dimensions of a tomb of a Minister of a lower
class shall be in every respect similar in length, breadth, and
lleight to the above. Their outer limits shall be five fathoms
square, and they shall be two and a halffathoms in height. The
work shall be completed by 250 labourers in three days. At
the time of interment white cloth shall be used for hangings.
I n other matters the same rule as before is to be followed.
   The inner dimensions of the tombs of persons of the rank xxv. 31•
of Dainin and Shunin shall be nine feet in length and four
feet in height and breadth. The ground shall be made level
and no mound raised. The work shall be completed by 100
labourers in one day.
   In the case of persons from the rank of Dairei to that of
Shochi inclusive, the tombs shall in all respects follow the
rule of Dainin, but the work shall be completed by fifty
labourers in one day.
   Let small stones 2 be used for the tombs of all from the
rank of Prince down to that of Shuchi, and let white cloth
be used for the hangings.
    When ordinary persons die, let them be buried in the
ground, and let the hangings be of coarse cloth. Let the
interment not be delayed for a single day.
   The construction of places of temporary interment is not
allowed in any case, from Princes down to common people.
   Not only in the Home provinces, but in the provinces
generally, let plots of ground be set apart for interments. 3 It

  1  Or 24 feet, says the " Shiikai."
  2  The reference is doubtless to the stones covering the roof of the vault,
which were of great size, some which I have seen \veighing many tons. A
note to the" Shukai" says that stones with luonumental inscriptions are
nleant. But no such stones have been found in connection with the tOlnbs
of this period.
  a There are numerous groups of these tombs still to be seen, 1110re
especially in the Home provinces, sometimes thirty or forty together,
usually on the lower slopes of the hills.
         220                         NIHONGI.

          is not permitted to pollute the earth by dispersed interments
          in various places.
              When a man dies, there have been cases of people sacri-
          ficing themselves by strangulation, or of strangling others by
          way of sacrifice, or of compelling the dead man's horse to be
          sacrificed, or of burying valuables in the grave in honour of
          the dead, or of cutting off the hair, and stabbing the thighs
          and pronouncing an eulogy on the dead (while in this condi-
KX\T. 32. tion).    Let all such old customs be entirely discontinued.
                   A certain book says :-' No gold or silver:, no silk
                brocades, and no coloured stuffs are to be buried.' Again
                it is said :-' From the 1finisters of all ranks down to the
                common people, it is not allowed to use gold or silver.'
              Should there be any cases of this decree being disregarded
           and these prohibitions infringed, the relations shall surely
           receive punishment.
              Again, there are many cases of persons who, having seen,
           say that they have not seen, or who, having not seen, say that
           they have seen, or who, having heard, say that they have not
           heard, or who, having not heard, say that they have heard,
           being deliberate liars, and devoid of truth in words and in sight.
              Again, there have been many cases in which slaves, both
           male and female, false to their masters in their poverty, betake
           themselves of their o\vn accord to influential houses in quest
           of a livelihood, which influential houses forcibly detain and
           purchase them, and do not send them to their original owners.
              Again, there have been very many cases in which wives
           or concubines, when dismissed by their husbands, have, after
           the lapse of years, married other husbands, as ordinary morality
           allows. Then their former husbands, after three or four years,
           have made greedy demands on the second husband's property,
           seeking their own gain.
              Again, there have been very many cases in which men,
            relying on their power, have rudely demanded people's
            daughters in marriage. In the interval, however, before going
            to his house, the girl has, of her own accord, married another,
            and the rude suitor has angrily made demands of the property
            of both families for his own gain.
               Again, there have been numerous cases of this kind.
            Sometimes a \vife who has lost her husband marries another
                                KOTO!{U.                                  221

man after the lapse of ten or t,venty· years and becomes his
spouse, or an unmarried girl is married for the first time. Upon
this, people, out of envy of the married pair, have made them
perform purgation. 1
   Again, there are cases in \vhich \vornen, \vho have become
men's wives and ,,"ho, being put a,va)' o,ving to their husbands'
dislike of them, have, in their mortification at this injury,
compelled themselves to become blemished ~ slaves.
   Again, there are cases in which the husband, haying
frequent occasion to be jealous of his \vife's illicit intercourse
\vith others, voluntarily appeals to the authorities to decide
the matter. Let such persons not lay their information until
they have obtained, let us say', three credible \\'itnesses to join
with them in making a declaration. \Vhy should they bring
forward ill-considered plaints?
   Again, there have been cases of men employed on forced
 labour in border lands \vho, when the ,,,ark \vas over and they
 were returning to their village, have fallen suddenly ill and
lain do,vn to die by the roadside. Upon this the (inmates of xxv. 33-
 the) houses by the roadside say :-' \\Thy should people be
   1 Harahi, clearing away, purgation, is properly a religious ceremony_   The
Oho-harahi, or "Great Purgation," ,,'as perforlned every year by the N aka-
tomi as a general purification of the sins of the people. The ritual used on
this occasion has come do,,'n to us, and is perhaps the Inest interesting of
the Norito. When harahi \\ras perfonned in the case of individual offences
the necessary offerings to the Gods ,vere provided by the guilty person (see
above, \r 01. I. p. 49). From this to a penalty the transition is easy, and has
parallels in other countries. In the present passage the harahi ,vas evi-
dentiy what we should no\v call a "squeeze.:' The" Tsiisho " COlnlnentator
quotes here a statenlent by one Kurokaha, to the following effect:-
~'During the first Inonth of the year follo\ving the marriage of a ne\\'ly-
united couple, their friends assemble at the house bearing pails of ,vater,
,vith which they souse the husband liberally. '[his is called harahi." It
Inay not be out of place to point out that marriage is in Inany uncivilized
countries considered as an infringelnent of the rights of the COll1ll1unity
 \"hieh calls for some sort of compensation.
    ~ The meaning of this tenn-rendered kotosaka in the "Original COlll-
 Inentary "-is not very clear. I t perhaps applies to persons who \vere lnade
 slaves on account of some offence or vice.
    Dr. Florenz and some Japanese scholars ,vholn he consulted take this
 view of this paragraph. I anl not sure, ho\vever, that the real nleaning is
 not that the husband, tnortified that his wife has left him from dislike, sells
 her as a slave.
   VOL. II.
222                           NIl-IONGI.

allowed to die on our road?' And they have accordingly
detained the companions of the deceased and compelled them
to do purgation. For this reason it often happens that even
if an elder brother lies do\vn and dies on the road, his younger
brother \vilI refuse to take up his body (for burial).
   Again, there are cases of peasants being dro\vned in a river.
The b:ystanders say :-' \Vhy should we be made to have any-
thing to do with drowned men?' They accordingly detain the
drowned man's companions and compel them to do purgation.
For this reason it often happens that even \vhen an elder
brother is drowned in a river his younger brother will not
render assistance.
   Again, there are cases of people \vho, \\Then emploY'ed on
forced labour, cook their rice by the roadside. U pan this the
(inmates of the) houses by the roadside say :-' Why should
people cook rice at their own pleasure on our road? ' and have
compelled them to do purgation.
   Again, there are cases \vhen people have applied to others
for the loan of pots in \vhich to boil their rice, and the pots
have knocked against something and have been upset. Upon
this the o\vner of th'e pot compels purgation to be made.
   All such practices are habitual among the unenlightened
vulgar. Let them now be discontinued \vithout exception, and
not permitted again.
   Again, there are cases in \vhich peasants, when they are
about to proceed to the capital, apprehensive lest their riding
horses should be worn out and unable to go, give two fathoms
of cloth 1 and two bundles of hemp to men of the two provinces
of Mikaha or Wohari, to hire them to feed their horses. After
they have been to the capital and are on their, way home, they
make them a present of a spade, and then find that the men of
1vlikaha, etc., have not only failed to feed their horses properly,
but have allowed them to die of starvation. In the case of
horses of a superior class, they conceive covetous desires, and
invent lying tales of their having been stolen, while in the case
of mares which become pregnant in their house, they cause
purgation to be made, and in the end make a plunder of the beast.
   Such things having come to our ears, We therefore no,v
establish the following regulation : -
                 1   Cloth was evidently used as money_
                               KOTOK.U.                                223

   V/henever horses are left at livery in an~y of the provinces
along the highway, let the owner take with him the man whom
he engages for this purpose, and make a full statement to the
village elder, handing over (to the latter) at the saIne time the
articles given as remuneration. It is unnecessary for him to
make any further payment \vhen he returns home. If he has xxv. 34-
caused the horse to suffer harm, he should get nothing.
   If anyone disobeys this edict, a severe penalty shall be
imposed.
   The dues payable to Jvlarket Commissioners; for main roads,
and to ferrymen, are abolished and lands are granted instead.
   Beginning \vith the Home provinces, and embracing the
provinces in all four quarters, during the agricultural months,2
let everyone apply himself early to the cultivation of the rice-
land. It is not meet at such a time to let them eat dainty food or
drink sake. Let faithful messengers be appointed to intimate
this to the Home provinces. And let the Kuni no Miyakko of
the provinces in every quarter choose good messengers to urge
(the peasants to \vork) in accordance with the edict."
   Autumn, 8th month, 14th day. An edict was issued,
sayIng : -
   " Going back to the origin of things, we find that it is Heaven
and Earth with the male and female principles of nature,S which
guard the four seasons from mutual confusion. We find, more-
over, that it is this Heaven and Earth 4 which produces the ten
thousand things. Amongst these ten thousand things Man is the
 most miraculously gifted. Among the most miraculously gifted
beings, the sage takes the position of ruler. Therefore the
 Sage Rulers, viz. the Emperors, take Heaven as their exelnplar
 in ruling the World, and never for a moment dismiss from
their breasts the thought of how men shall gain their fit place.
   Now as to the names of the early Princes, the Omi, Muraji,
TOlllO no Miyakko and Kuni no Miyakko have divided their

  1 l'he" Shoku-in-ryo" says the Market COlnlnissioner shall have superin-

tendence of the currency, COlnmerce, the genuineness of \\'ares, the justness
of weights and lneasures, buying and selling prices, and prohibitions and
offences (relating thereto.)
  ~ i.e. of getting in the crops.
  3 1'hc Yin and Yang of Chinese philosophy.      The interlinear gloss has
samuku-atataka, i.e. "cold and \vann," a n105t inadequate rendering.
  .a i.e. Nature.
          224                              NIHONGI.

          various Be 1 and allotted them severally to their various titles (or
          surnames). The)' after\vards took the various Be of the people,
         and made them reside in the provinces and districts, one mixed
          up \vith another. The consequence has been to make father
         and child to bear different surnames, and brothers to be
         reckoned of distinct families, while husbands and \vi\"es have
         names 2 different from one another. One family' is divided into
         five or split up into six, and both Court and countr)r are there-
xxv. 35. fore filled with contentious suits. No settlement has been come
         to, and the mutual confusion grows worse and worse. Let the
         various Be, therefore, beginning with those of the reigning
         Emperor and including those in the possession of the Omi,
         Muraji, etc., be, \vithout exception, abolished, and let them be-
         come subjects of the State. Those \vho have become Torno no
         Miyakko by borro\\?ing the names of princes, and those \\,ho
         have become Omi or Muraji on the strength of the names of
         ancestors,J may not full)' apprehend our purport, and might
         think, if they heard this announcement without ,varning, that
         the names borro\ved by their ancestors would become extinct.
         We therefore make this announcement beforehand, so that the)r
         tna.y understand what are our intentions.
            The children of rulers succeed one another in the government
         of the Empire, and it is ,veIl kno\\'n that the names of the actual
         Emperor and of his Imperial ancestors \vill not be forgotten by'
         the world. But the names of sovereigns are lightl)' giyen to
         rivers and plains,4 or comn1on people are called by them. This
             1 Instituted in cOlluneluoration of Princes and bearing their naU1es, or

         names intended to recall their ll1en10ry.
            2 ~ or Names ll1Ust here apply to surnames, or rather Be names.         The
         Japanese at this tinle had no proper surnalnes, and the Chinese characters
         for the t\VO kinds of nalnes are not ahvays rightly distinguished.
            3 The" Shukai'~ quotes here the instances of Kibitsuhiko no Mikoto,

         \\'hose descendants ,,,ere called Kibi no Omi, and Achiki, \vhose descendants
         \vere styled Achiki no Fubito.
            .. The" Shukai :' editor instances Annei Tenno, \vhose nan1e of Shiki-tsu-
         hiko is borne by the plain of Shiki in Yamato, and Yiiriakl1 Tenno, whose
         nan1e of Ohohatsl1se is applied to the River Hatsuse-gawa. But it is more
         likely that the facts are the other ,,'ar, and that the nalnes of places ,,'ere
         given to the Emperors.
            The " Shoku-ni-hon-g-o-ki~' (a continuation of the" Nihongi") records an
         edict which directed the alteration of nanles of persons, villages, Inountains,
         or rh'ers, \vhich coincided with the nalnes (i1Jli11a) of Enlperors.
                                    KOTOK.U.                                   212


is a truly fearful state of things. The appellations of sovereigns,
like the sun and moon, will float afar: the names of those of
the Imperial line 1 ,viII last for ever, like unto Heaven and
Earth. Such being our opinion, \\"e announce as follo,vs:-
, Do ye all, from those of the Imperial line do\vn to the Ministers,
the Daibu, Omi, 11uraji, and Torno no Miyakko, who do Us
service, (in short) all persons of ,vhatever Uji ~ [One book has
, royal subjects of \vhatever name '], give ear to what We say.
\Vith regard to the forn1 of y'our service, 'Ve now abolish the
former offices and constitute afresh the hundred bureaus.
We shall, moreover, grant grades of rank and confer official
dignities. 3
    Let the local Governors ,vho are no,,, being despatched,
and also the Kuni no Miyakko of the same provinces, give ear
 to what \ve say. In regard to the method of administration
 notified last year to the Court .l~ssembly,4 let the previous
 arrangement be follo\\-ed, and let the rice-lands \vhich are re-
 ceived and measured be granted equally to the people, without
 distinction of persons.~ In granting rice-lands the peasants'
 houses should adjoin the land. Those \vhose houses lie near
 the lands must therefore have the preference. In this sense
 receive Our injunctions.
    In regard to commuted taxes,6 they should be collected from
males (only).
    Labourers should be supplied at the rate of one for every
fifty houses. The boundaries of the provinces should be xxv. 36 .
examined and a description or map prepared, \vhich should be
brought here and produced for Our inspection. The names of
the provinces and districts ,viiI be settled \vhen you come.
   With respect to the places where embankments are to be
constructed, or canals dug, and the extent of rice-land to be
     1 idl ~, lit. ancestors   and children. 13ut I strongly suspect that        iB.
 is a mistake for ~ imperial.
     2 House of nobles.

   3 This edict seems intended as a final severance of titles of various kinds fronl

the offices they nOlninally represeQt. Official rank (fit) and grade of office <'")
do not invariably correspond, though they do in a general \\ray. A. Daijin, for
example, is not necessarily first rank, though he "pill doubtless hold high
rank, second or third at least.
    -4 Cht)shii. The reference is to the Choshiishi named above, XX\!. 23.
    $) Sec above, XXV. 17-                       Ii Of other things than rice.
         226                             NIHONGI.

          brought under cultivation, in the various provinces, uniform
          provision will be made for causing such \vork to be executed.'
             Give ear to and understand these injunctions."
             9th month. The Shotoko, Kuromaro, Takamuko no Hakase,
          was sent to Silla to cause them to send a hostage. Ultimately
          tIle tribute from Imna \vas discontinued.
             In this month the Emperor occupied the temporary Palace
          of I(ahadzu. 1 [Some books have" detached Palace."]
             In this year the rats of the province of Koshi drew together
          in troops b~y night and day, and took their departure towards
          the East.
A.D. 647·    3rd year, Spring, 1st month, 15th day. There ,vas archery at
          the Court.
             On this da:y Koryi> and Silla sent messengers together to offer
          tribute.
             Summer, 4th month, 29th day. An edict was issued as
          follows : -
             "The Empire ,vas entrusted (by the Sun-Goddess to her
          descendants, \vith the words) , My children, in their capacity of
          Deities, shall rule it.' [The phrase 'Il ~I\I means to follow the
          way of the Gods, or again to possess in oneself the way of
          the Gods.] For this reason, this country, since Heaven and
          Earth began, has been a monarch)T. From the time that
          Our Imperial ancestor 2 first ruled the land, there has been
          great concord:1 in the Empire, and there has never been any
xxv. 37. factiousness. In recent times, however, the names, first of the
          Gods, and then of the Emperors, have in some cases been
          separated (from their proper application) and converted into
          the Vji of Omi or Muraji, or they have been separated and made
          the qualifications of Miyakko,4 etc. In consequence of this, the
          minds of the people of the \vhole country take a strong
          partisan bias, and conceiving a deep sense of the me and thee,
          hold firmly each to their names. Moreover the feeble and in-
          competent Omi, Muraji, Torno no 1fiyakko and Runi no

           ) Probably pronounced Kodzu and identical \vith . . i$ (Kodzu), where
         a palace of the Emperor Nintoku stood at Osaka.
           2 Jimlnu Tenno.                         ~ Vide Legge's" Shooking," p. 337.
           .. The " Shlikai n editor gives as instances that the descendants of the God
         Oho-kuni-nusbi are called Oho-kuni-nushi, of Oho-kuDle no :Nlikoto are called
         Kun1e no Atahe.
                               KOTOl(U.                                 227

Nliyakko make of such names their family names; and so the
nalnes of Gods and the names of sovereigns are applied to per-
sons and places in an unauthorized Inanner, in accordance with
the bent of their o\vn feelings. N O\V, by using the names of
Gods and the nanles of sovereigns as bribes, they draw to
themselves the slaves of others, and so bring dishonour upon
unspotted names. The consequence is that the minds of the
people have become unsettled and the government of the coun-
try cannot be carried on. The duty has therefore no\v devolved
on V s in Our capacity as Celestial Divinity, to regulate and
settle these things. In order to Inake them understood, and
thereby to order the State and to order the people, \Ve shall
issue, one after another, a succession of edicts, one earlier,
another later, one to-day and another to-morro\v. But the
people, \vho have always trusted in the civilizing influence 1 ex-
ercised by the Emperors, and \vho are used to old customs, will
certainly find it hard to \vait until these edicts are made. We
shall therefore remit to all, from Princes and Ministers down
to the common people of all classes, the tax in lieu of service."
    In this year Wogohori 2 was pulled down and a Palace
 built.
   The Emperor, having taken up 11is residence in the Palace
 of Wogohori, established a Law for Ceremonies, the regulations
of which were as follows : -
    All persons holding official rank must draw up in lines to
 right and left outside the south gate at the hour of the Tiger,a
and wait there until the first appearance of the sun. They
 shall then enter the Court, and having made their obeisances,
 shall attend in the Hall. Those who come late will not be
 permitted to enter and take up their attendance. When the
 hour of the Horse 4 arrives, they shall retire when they hear
 the sound of the bell. The officer whose business it is to strike
 the bell shall wear a red apron. The bell-stand shall be set up
 in the Middle Court.

   1 The interlinear gloss is Ini omofu koto, i.e. "august thoughts," which is

ludicrously inadequate. I t is as impossible to render such phrases in pure
Japanese as it \vould be in Anglo-Saxon.
  ~ The small (governlnent house of a) district. It seems to have become a
proper name.
  :1 3 to 5 a.Ill.                        4 I I to I, noon.
            228                              NIHONGI.

               The engineer of the rank of Daisen,l Arata\vi no Hirafu,
XXV. 38.     Yamato no Aya no Atahe, mistakenly dug a canal which heled
            to Naniha and thereby distressed the people. Upon this some
            one presented a memorial of remonstrance, and the Emperor
            made a decree, saying :-" \Ve unwisely gave ear to Hirafu's
            misrepresentations, and so dug this canal to no purpose. It
            is We who are to blame." That same day the work \vas
            discontinued. 3
              \Vinter, roth month, 11th day. The Emperor made a
           progress to the hot baths of Arima. He was accompanied b~y
           the Oho-omi of the Right and Left, and by the other Ministers
           and Daibu.
              12th month, last day. The Emperor returned from the hot
           baths and stayed in the temporary Palace of Muko.
              On this day the Palace of the Prince Imperial took fire, to
           the great marvel of the people of that time.
              In this year there were instituted caps of seven kinds and
           thirteen grades.
              The first was called Shoku-kwan. 4 Of this there were
           two grades, the greater and the lesser.                  It was made of
           woven stuff, and embroidered on the borders. The colour of
           the clothing was in both cases dark purple.
             The second was called Shu-kwan. 5 Of this there were
           two grades, the greater and the lesser. It \vas made of
             1   This rank was not introduced until later.
             2   It is the same person who is called above Hirafu, Yanlato no Aya noAtahe,
           and below Hirafu, Aratawi no Atahe. A few lines further on, the Emperor
           speaks of him as Rirafu. The complete title Aratawi no H irafu, Yamato no
           Aya no Atahe, corresponds pretty exactly to such an English description as
           "Edmund of Langley, Duke of York." H irafu is the personal name corre-
           sponding to Edmund; Langley and Aratawi are nanles of places, the
           residences of the persons in question or their forefathers; Duke and Atahe
           are titles. Yamato no Aya is, however, the name of a comlnunity of artisans
           of presumed Chinese descent who were settled in Yaluato, while York
           is a territorial designation, of which, it Inay be noted, there are plenty
           among the ancient Japanese nobility.
              3 I have Inyself in 1869 seen a canal in course of construction at Osaka,

           which cost Inany thousands of pounds, and which ,vas ultiulately abandoned
           as inlpracticable.
              4 i.e. woven-cap.    No doubt some special fabric is meant, which it is now
           difficult to identify.
              d Embroidered cap.
                                 KOTOKU.                                 229

embroidered stuff. The border of the cap and the colour of
the clothing \vas the same as for the Shoku.. kwan.
   The third was called Shi-k\van. 1 Of this there \vere two XX". 39.
grades, the greater and the lesser. It \vas made of purple
material, \vith a border of woven stuff. The colour of the
clothing was light purple.
   The fourth \vas called Kin.. k\van. 2 Of this there were
t\VO grades, the greater and the lesser. The greater Kin-kwan
\vas made of Dai.. haku-sen 3 brocade, and had the cap-border
of \voven stuff: the lesser I(in-kwan ,vas made of Shu-haku-
sen brocade, and had the cap-border of Dai-haku-sen brocade.
The colour of the clothing was in both cases true dark red.
   The fifth was called Sei-kwan," and was made of blue silk.
Of this there were two grades, the greater and the lesser. The
greater Sei-kwan had a border of Dai-haku-sen brocade. The
colour of the clothing \vas in both cases deep violet.
   The sixth ,vas called I\:ok-k\van,& and ,vas made of black
silk. Of this there \vere two grades, the greater and the lesser.
The greater I(ok-kwan had a border of wheel-pattern brocade.
The lesser I{ok-kwan had a border of diamond-pattern
brocade. The colour of the clothing was in both cases green. 6
   The seventh was called I{embu 7 [the initial (or lowest) rank.
It was also called Risshin].8 It was made of black silk and
had a border of dark violet.
   In addition to the above there were To-kwan,9 made of
black silk. These caps had varnished gauze stretched behind.
  1  Purple-cap.                                    2 Brocade-cap.

  3  Nothing 1110re is kno\vn of this than that Hakusen scenlS to have been
the nalne of a place.
   4 Blue cap.      Neither the Chinese nor Japanese in ordinary speech or
\vriting think it worth \vhile to distinguish bet\veen green and blue.iff,the
Chinese character used here stands for both colours, and the corresponding
Japanese word awoki nlay be either green or blue. It is also used of a pale
complexion, and, strange to say, of a black horse. I t does not follo\\t that
these nations cannot distinguish bet\veen green and blue. I have seen a
dyer's salnple book \vhich contained nunlerous shades of both, each \vith an
appropriate nalne.
   ~ Black-cap.                           11 Especially grass-green.

   i Kembu means "to establish valour.:'
   8 Risshin Ineans advancenlent.

   9 Stirrup-caps, so called no doubt frolll their shape. The Japanese name
is tsubo.kaI1tI111Iri, i.e. jar-caps.
         23°                             NIHONGI.

             Distinctions of rank were indicated b~y the border and the
          hair ornaments. l The latter \vere in shape like a cicada. The
          hair ornaments of the grades from the Lesser Kin-k\van
          upwards were of a combination of gold and silver: the hair
xxv. 40. ornaments of the Greater and Lesser Seik\van \vere made of
          silver: the hair ornaments of the Greater and Lesser I{ok-
          kwan \tvere made of copper. The Kembu caps had no hair
          ornaments.
             These caps \\·ere \vorn at Grand Assemblies,~ ,vhen foreign
          guests \vere entertained, and at the (Buddhist) maigre feasts of
          the fourth :~ month and seventh month.
             Silla sent Kim Chhyun-chhyu, a Superior !\Iinister, of the
          rank of Greater Ason, and others to accompany the Hakase,
          Takamuko no Kuromaro, of Shutoko rank, and Oshikuma,
          Nakatomi no Muraji, of n1iddle Shusen rank,4 and bring a
          present to the Emperor of a peacock and a parrot. Chh)"un..
          chhyu ,vas made -a hostage. He \vas a handsome man, ,,"ho
          talked and smiled agreeably.5
             The Nutari 6 barrier ,vas constructed, and a barrier-settlement
          established. Old men talked to one another, saying :-" The
          migration of the rats to\vards the East some years ago
          prefigured the making of this barrier."
A.D. 648.    4th year. Spring, 1st month, 1st da~y. The ceremony' of
          New Year's congratulations took place.
             In the evening the Emperor proceeded to the Palace of
          Toyosaki in Naniha.
             2nd month, Ist day. Student priests \vere sent to Corea.
             8th da~y. The Oho-omi Abe invited the four classes 7 to the
          Temple of Shitenuji, where, having brought in four images of
          Buddha, he had them enshrined \vithin the pagoda. He con-
           1    Uzu.
           :2  As at the Ne\v \"ear's receptions, the ceremony of accession, etc.
           J The anniversary of the birth of Buddha and the festi"al of All-Souls-

         no,v kno,vn as bon. Vide Eitel's "Handbook "-article LTllalnbana, also
         " Things Japanese," pp. 155, 15 6.
           4 See belo\v, XXV. 41, \vhere, ho\vever, no nliddle         Sh6sen rank is
         mentioned, only upper and lo\ver.
            ~t He is Inentioned in the " Tong-kanl."
            6 In Echigo, as a defence against the Yemishi or Ainos.

            7 Of Buddhists, viz.: Biku (Bhikchu), Bikuni (BhikchunI), Uhasoku (Upa-
         saka) and Ubai (Upasika). Priests, nuns, and lay ll1elnbers, luale and fenlale.
                                KOTOKU.                                  23 1
structed a figure of the wondrous Vulture Mountain/ which he
made by piling up drums on one another.                        XX\'. 4 1 •
   Summer, 4th month, 1st day. The old caps were discon-
tinued. The Oho~omi of the Left and Right, however,
continued to wear the old caps.
   This year Silla sent envoys bearing tribute.
   The barrier of Ihabune 2 \vas put to rights as a precaution
against the Yemishi. Eventually subjects' from the provinces
of Koshi and Shinano were selected, and a barrier-settlenlent
for the first time established.
   5th year. Spring, 1st month, 1st day. The New Year's .\ .D.649·
congratulations took place.
   2nd month.       Nineteen cap grades were instituted, as
follows : -
      First       Dai-shiki           (greater-waven-stuff)
      Second      Sho-shiki           (lesser-\voven-stuff)
      Third       Dai-shu             (greater embroidery)
      Fourth      Sho-shu            (lesser       do.       )
      Fifth       Dai-shi            (greater purple)
      Sixth       Sho-shi            (lesser      do.)
      Seventh     Upper Dai-kwa (greater flower)
      Eighth      Lo\ver Dai-kwa (           do.       )
      Ninth       Upper Shu-kwa (lesser Hower)
      Tenth       Lo,ver Shu-kwa (          do.      )
      Eleventh    Upper Dai-sen 3 (greater lnountain)
      Twelfth     Lo\ver Dai-sen (            do.          J
      Thirteenth Upper Shu-sen (lesser mountain)
      Fourteenth Lower Sho-sen (              do.        )
      Fifteenth   Upper Dai-otsll -l
      Sixteenth Lo\ver Dai-otsu
      Seventeenth Upper Shu-otSli

  ! Gridhrakiita. Vide Eitel, sub voce.       ~ In Echigo.     3 Or Daisan.
  4 Otsu (~) is stated by the Japanese C0111nlentators to be put {or 8,
which has the same sound. Dai-otsu would then mean Greater Kingfisher,
and Sho-otsu Lesser Kingfisher, and it is true that there \vas a kingfisher
cap in China. But does not rather the follo\ving extract fronl C;iles apply?-
"The G of the tiger,-i.e. its Inajesty, \vhich is supposed to be in the shape
of this character, and concealed under the skin of its ribs. Anyone \vho
gets it and wears it, as an official will be a terror to evil-doers, while as a
private individual he \vill have no enemies."
          23 2                                 NIHONGI.

             Eighteenth Lo,ver Sho-otsu
              Nineteenth Risshin            (Promotion or advancement)
              In this month an order \vas given to the Hakase, Takamuko
          no Kuromaro, and the Buddhist Priest Bin to establish Eight
           Departnlents of State and one hundred bureaus. 1
xxv. 42      3rd month, 17th day. Abe no Oho-omi died. The Emperor
          proceeded to the Shujaku ~ gate, \vhere he raised up lamenta-
          tions for him and sho\ved much emotion. The Empress
          Dowager, the Prince Imperial, and the other Princes, together
          with the ~Iinisters of every rank, all, follo,ving his exan1ple,
          mourned and lamented. 3
             24th day. Hiuga, Saga no Omi [styled 4 ~IusashiJ slandered
          the Oho-omi Kurayamada to the Prince Imperial, saying:-
          " Maro, thy servant's elder brother by a different mother, is
          watching the opportunity of the Prince Imperial making an
          excursion to the seasid~, in order to do him a mischief. He
          ,viII ere long commit treason." The Prince Imperial believed
          this. The Enlperor sent Ohotomo no !(omano Muraji,
          Mikuni no ~Iaro no I{imi, and Hodzumi no I{urafu no Omi to
          the Oho-omi, I{urayamada no ~faro, and questioned him as to
          the truth of the charge of treason. The Dho-ami ans\vered
          and said :-" I ,viII have a personal intervie\v \vith the Enlperor,

             1 These eight Departnlents \vere in iluitation of the six boards of the

          Thang Dynasty in China. They \vere the N akatsukasa Sh6, or Central
          Departlnent; the Shikibu Sh6, or Board of Civil Office; the Jibu 5ho, or
          Board of Cerenl0nies; the l\Iilnbu 5ho, or Board of Population; the
          Hyobu Sho, or Board of War; the Gyobu 5ho, or Board of Justice; the
          Ohokura Sho, or Treasury; and the Kunai Sho, or Household Departnlent.
          Those \vho ,,·ish to exatnine this 11latter Inore particularly are referred to
          \\T alter Dickson's " Japan," Count I to's" COlnmentaries on the Constitution
          of the Enlpire/' fronl \vhich Dr. Florenz quotes largely, and !vlayers'
          " Chinese Handbook," pp. 324, 326, 332. Of course the \vord "hundred ~, in
          hundred bureaus is not to be taken literally.
             ~ The Scarlet Bird or South Gate.
             3 This reminds one of Achilles acting as fuglelnan to the 1110urners at the

          funeral of Patroclus-ToLO'L aE rr,iAELa'1) datJlov '~ijpx£ 100£0. "Iliad," XX I I I. 17.
          The official character of the Inourning is shown by the fact that it took
          place at the Southern Gate of the Palace. The Emperor's official position is
          facing the South, even at this day.
             4 The ~ or style.     "A name or style taken at the age of t,,·enty. A

          by his  *
          lnan's Prince and father call hiln by his ming (~), other people call him
                      or style."-Giles.
                                KOTOKU.                  212


and shall then answer to the charge brought against me." The
Emperor again sent Mikuni no Mara no I{imi and Hodzunli,
Kurafu no Omi, to investigate the circumstances of the treason.
The Oho-omi, ~faro, again answerell as before. The Emperor
was therefore about to raise an armed force and surround there-
with the Oho-ami's house, when the Oho-omi, taking- with him
his two sons, Hushi 1 and Akagoma [also called ~1a\vosu], fled
by way of Chinu towards the boundary of the province of
Yamato. Before this, Koshi, the Oho-omi's eldest son, was
already staying in Yamato, where he \vas building the Temple.
 (This means that he \vas staying in the Yamada house.] Now
being suddenly apprised that his father was coming thither in
flight, he \vent out to meet him at the great Tsuki tree in
Imaki. Having approached, he took the lead and entered the
Temple. Then he looked back to the Oho-omi and said:-
"Koshi desires to advance straight on in person, and oppose
the army which is coming." But the Oho-omi would not allow it.
That night Koshi conceived the idea of burning the Palace
[the Palace of Woharida is meantJ, and went on assembling
troops.
   25th day. The Oho-omi addressed his eldest son Koshi, xxv. 43.
saying :-" Dost thou love thy life?" Koshi answered and
said :-" I love it not." The Oho-omi thereupon harangued
the priests of the Yamada Temple, his eldest son I{oshi and
some tens of other persons, saying :-" Shall one who is in the
position of vassal contrive treason against his Lord? Shall
the duty of a son to a father be brought to nothing? This
temple was originally built, not for me personally, but under a
vow for the sake of the Emperor. I have now been slandered
by Musashi, and I fear that I shall be unjustly put to death.
With so near a prospect of the yellow springs/ I would with-
draw (from life) still cherishing fidelity in my bosom, and the
object of my coming to this Temple is that my last moments
may be made easier."
  When he had done speaking, he opened the door of the
Buddha Hall and uttered a vow, saying :-" In all future
births and existences, let me not have resentment against my
sovereign!" When he had made this vow, he strangled him-

 1   Hoshi nleans Buddhist priest.          2   Hades.
        234                              NIHONGI.

         self and died. His ,vife and children, to the number of eight
         persons, sacrificed 1 themselves \vith hinl.
            On this day', Oha-toma no Kama no ~furaji and Soga no
         Hiuga no On1i ,vere sent as Generals in command of a bod)' of
         troops to pursue the Oho-onli. General Ohotomo no Muraji
         and his colleague had gone as far as I(uroyama \vhen ~lu,
         Hashi no 1'Iuraji, and OIllimaro'l Uneme no ami, came running
         from the \~anlada Temple, and brought information that the
         Oho-on1i Saga, ,vith his three sons and one daughter, had
         alread)· committed suicide together by strangulation.         The
         Generals therefore returned from Tajihi no Saka.
            26th da)9. The ,vife, children, and personal attendants of
         the Oho-ami Yamada, ,vho conlnlitted. suicide by strangulation,
         \vere many'. Kurafu, Hodzumi no ami, arrested in a body' thl"
         Oho-omi's people, viz. Tsukushi, Taguchi no Omi, and others,
         placed canglles round their necks, and tied their l1ands bellind
         their backs. That night, 1Jaro, I~i no Omi, Hiuga, Saga no Omi~
         and Kurafu, Hodzumi no Omi, having surrounded the Temple
xxv. 44. \vith an armed force, called Shiho, Mononobe no Futsuta no
         Miyakko, and ordered him to cut off the Oho-omi's head.
         Upon this Futsnta no Shiho dre\v his s\vord, raised up the
         body" on its point, )yelled and reviled, and then cut it off.
            30th da)". There \vere executed, as implicated \vith the
         Oho-ami, Saga no Yamada, Tsukushi, Taguchi no Omi,
         ~fiminashi no Dotoko, Takada no Shika,vo,~ Nukadabe no
         Yumasu no Muraji, Hada no Adera and others, fourteen persons
         in all. Nine \vere strangled,3 and fifteen banished.
            In this month, messengers ,\yere sent to take over the property'
         of the Oho-omi, Yamada. Among his propert)" ,vas a beautiful
         book with the inscription "Book belonging to the Prince
         Imperial," and a valuable object inscribed "Propert}· of the
          Prince Imperial." \Vhen the messengers returned and reported
         the circumstances of their having taken over the property, the
          Prince Imperial recognized for the first time that the heart of
         the Oho-omi had remained pure and unspotted. He ,vas seized
         with shame and remorse for the past, and be,vailed his fate
           1   Jro ;f, Junshi.                            ~ U gIY·lnan.
           J  O\ving to the objection entertained in China and Japan to the ll1utilation
         of the body, hanging or strangulation is reckoned a less severe punishnlent
         than decapitation.
                                 KOTOKU.                                235
incessantly. Hiuga no On1i was accordingly appointed Viceroy
of Tsukushi. The people of the time said to one another, " Is
not this a disguised banishment? "                               xxv. 45·
   When Soga no Miyakko hime, consort of the Prince Imperial,
heard that her father the Oho-omi had been decapitated by
Shiho, she took it deeply to heart, and grieved bitterl)r. She
detested hearing Shiho's name mentioned, and so her personal
attendants, whenever they had occasion to speak of salt (shiho),
altered the word and called it I{itashi. 1 At last Miyakko hime
died of a broken heart. When the Prince Imperial heard that
she had passed a\va)?, he \vas grieved and deeply shocked, and
bewailed her loss exceedingly. U pan this 11itsu, N unaka
Kahara no Fubito, came forward and presented verses of poetry
as follows : -
                  On a lllountain-streanl
                  Two Inandarin-ducks 2 there be,
                  "Tell matched together :--
                  But the \vife \vho \vas a like Inate for me
                  \'Tho is it that has taken a\vay?

  This was the first verse.

                  Thoug-h on every tree
                  The flowers are blooming,
                  How can it be that
                  My darling \vife
                  Does not blossonl again?

   This was the second verse.
   The Prince Imperial, with a sigh of deep despair, praised
the verses, saying :-" Ho\v beautiful! how pathetic!" So he
gave him his lute 3 and made him sing them. He also presented
him with four hiki of silk, twenty tan of cloth, and two bags
of floss silk.
  Summer, 4th month, 20th day. Kose no Tokodako no Omi,
of Shushi rank, was granted the rank of Daishi, and was made
Oho-on1i of the Left. 4
   Ohotomo no Nagatoko no Muraji [styled Miimakahi] of

  1 Hard or coarse salt.
  2 The elnbleul of conjugal love in China and Japan, like the turtle dove in
Europe.
  3 Kota.                                4 Sadaijin in later parlance.
         237                               NIHOKGI.

          Shoshi rank, was granted the rank of Daishi, and ,vas made
          Oho-ami of the Right!
             5th month, 1st day. Shikofu, ~li,va no I\:imi, of Lo,ver
          Shok,va rank, Tsunomaro, Harahibe no 1Iuraji 2 of Upper
xxv. 46. Daisen rank, and others \vere sent to Silla.
             This year, the Queen of Silla sent I{im Ta-sya, Sa-son of
         Sa-ti>k·pu, as hostage. He had a suite of thirty persons.
                  One Buddhist priest, t,vo Si-rang,:{ one Assistant, one
               Usher, five Chung-kek/ ten Artists/' one Interpreter,
               and sixteen servants of various kinds-in all thirty'-seven
               persons.
A.D. 650     Hakuchi,6 1st year, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. The Imperial
         c11ariot proceeded to the Palace of Ajifu, ,,,here the Emperor
         viewed the ceremonies of the Ne,v Year's congratulations.
            On this day the Imperial chariot returned to the Palace.
            2nd month, 9th day. Shikofu, I{usakabe no l\'1uraji,
         Governor of the Province of Anato, presented to the Enlperor
         a ,vhite pheasant, saying :-" Nihe, a relation of Obito, the Kuni
         no ~:{iyakko, caught it on the 9th day of the first month on
         }.tlount \Vono~yama." U pan this inquiry ,vas made of the Lords
         of Pekche, who said :-" In the eleventh year 7 of y"ung-p'ing,
         in the reign of Ming Ti of the Later Han dynast)·, ,vhite
         pheasants ,vere seen in a certain place." Further, inquiry ,vas
         made of the Buddhist priests, ,vho ans\vered and said :-" \Vith
         our ears \ve have not heard, nor \vith our ey'es have ,,,e seen
xxv. 47- such. Ma~y it please Your Majesty to order a general amnesty;
         and so give joy to the hearts of the people."
            The Priest Doto said :-" At one time !{oryo desired to build
         a Buddhist Temple. There \vas no place ,vhich ,vas not
         examined for this purpose. Then in a certain place a "rhite

          1  LTdaijin.
          2  A note in the" Shiikai" identifies this falnily ,,·ith the Kalnori no Muraji
        of the" Seishiroku.' 'They seenl to have had originally SOll1ethillg to do with
        the perfOrIllanCe of the harahi or purification cerelllonies.
          3 In China ~i nli are Vice-Presidents of a Board.             Chancellors (?)
                fr,
          .. ~t='     literally nliddle guests, officials of l11iddle rank.
          s 1ncluding- skilled artisans.
          •• i.e. "\vhite pheasant." The reason for this nalne of the year-period
        appears belo\v.
          7 A.D. 68.
                               KOTOKU.                                237
deer was seen quietly moving, and eventuall~y a Temple \\ras
built on this spot. It ,vas called the Temple of the park of the
white deer, and the practice of the Buddhist Law \vas there
permanently established. Again, a ,vhite sparrow was seen at
the farmstead of a certain Temple. The people of the country
all said that it ,vas a good omen. l\foreover, EnvO}Ts sent to
Great Thang 1 brought back a dead cro\v with three legs.~ The
people of the country again said that this \vas a good omen.
Though these things are trifles, yet they are deemed of favour-
able omen. 1\1uch more is this so in the case of a \vhite
pheasant."
   The Priest Bin said :-" This is to be deemed a luck}T omen,
and it may reasonably be accounted a rare object. I have
respectfully heard that ,vhen a Ruler extends his influence to
all four quarters, then \vill \vhite pheasants be seen. They
appear, moreover, when a Ruler's sacrifices are not in mutual
disaccord, and ,,,hen his banquets and costumes are in due
measure. Again, when a Ruler is of frugal habits, \vhite
pheasants are made to come forth on the hills. Again, they
appear when the Ruler is sage and humane. In the time of
the Emperor Ch'eng \Vang of the Chou Dynasty, the Yiieh-
shang 3 family brought and presented to the Emperor a white
pheasan~, saying :-' We were told by the old men of our
country :-" \Vhat a long time it has been since there have been
any exceptional storms or long-continued rains, and that the
great rivers and the sea have not surged up over the land!
Three years have now elapsed. We think that in the Central
Land there is a Sage. Would it not be well to go and pay xxv. 48.
your respects at his Court?" We have therefore come, having
tripled our interpreters.' Again, in the first year of Hien-ning 4
in the reign of Wu-ti of the Tsin Dynasty, one was seen in
Sung-tsze. This is accordingly a favourable omen. A general
amnesty ought to be granted."
   U pan this the white pheasant was let loose in the garden.
   15th day. The array of guards at Court was like that on

  1  China.
  ~  We have obviollsly here an echo of the Chinese 111yth of a red three-
legged cro\v which inhabits the sun, and \vhich has all manner of mystical
significance.
   3 The name of a region lying to the south of China.         « .A.D. 275.
 VOL. II.                                                       R
         237                            NII-IONGI.

         the occasion of a Ne\v Year's reception. The Oho-omi of the
         Right and Left and all the functionaries fornled four lines Qut-
         side of the purple gate. Ihimushi, Ahata no Omi, and three
         others were made to take the pheasant's litter and move off
         ahead, while the Oho-omi of the Right and Left at the head of
         all the functionaries and Phung-chyang, Lord of Pekche, his
         younger brother Se-syong, Chh~yung-seung" the physician to
         the I{ing of Koryo, by name Mo-chhi, the scholar attached to
         the Court of Silla, and others, advanced into the Central Court.
         These fOUf men, viz.. 1\Iaro, Mikuni no Kimi, Takami, "Tina
         no Kinli, Mikaho, Miwa no Kimi, and l\Iaro Kida,2 Ki no Omi,
         taking up the pheasant's litter in turn, advanced in front of the
xxv. 49. Hall. Then the Oho-omi of the Right and Left approached
         and held the litter by the forward end. The Prince of Ise,
         ~faro, Mikuni no Kimi, and \Voguso, Kura no Omi, took hold
         of the hinder end of the. litter and placed it before the Imperial
         throne. The Emperor straightvvay called the Prince Imperial,
         and they took it and examined it together. The Prince Imperial
         having retired, made repeated obeisances, and caused the Oho-
         omi Kose to offer a congratulatory address, saying :-" The
         l\Iinisters and functionaries offer their congratulations. Inas-
         much as Your Majesty governs the En1pire \vith serene virtue,
         there is here a white pheasant, produced in the western region.
         This is a sign that Your Majesty will continue for a thousand
         autumns and ten thousand years peacefully to govern the Great-
         eight-islands 3 of the four quarters. It is the prayer of the
         Ministers, functionaries, and people that they may serve Your
         Majesty with the utmost zeal and fidelity."
            Having finished this congratulatory speech, he made repeated
         obeisances. The Emperor said : -
            " When a sage Ruler appears in the world and rules the
         Empire, Heaven is responsive to him, and manifests favourable
         omens. In ancient times, during the reign of Ch'eng-wang of
         the Chou Dynasty, a ruler of the Western land,4 and again in
         the time of Ming Ti of the Han Dynasty, \vhite pheasants were

          1 Phung-chyang)s uncle.
          2 So the "Shiikai n edition. But it has been conjectured \vith some
        probability that Kida is really the name of the Silla scholar just mentioned,
        which has con1e in here by mistake.
          3 Oho.ya-shima.    See \rol. I. p. 15.                    .. China.
                                 KOTOKU.                                  239
seen. I n this our Land of Japan, 1 during the reign of the
Emperor Homuda/ a ,vhite crow made its nest in the Palace.
In the time of the Emperor Oho-sazaki/ a Dragon-horse
appeared in the \Vest. 4 This sho\vs that from ancient times
until no,v, there have been many cases of auspicious OInens
appearing in response to virtuous rulers. \Vhat ,ve call
phcenixes, unicorns,:> white pheasants, white cro\vs, and such xxv. 50.
like birds and beasts, even including herbs and trees, in short
all things llaving the property of significant response, are
favourable omens and auspicious signs produced by Heaven
and Earth. N o,v that \vise and enlightened sovereigns spould
obtain such auspicious omens is meet and proper. But why
should \Ve, \vho are so empty and shallow, have this good
fortune? It is no doubt wholly due to our Assistants, the
 Ministers, Omi, l\Jluraji, Torno no ~liyakko and I{uni no
 1'liyakko, each. of vvhom, with the utmost loyalty, conforms
 to the regulations that are made. For this rt:ason, let all,
 from the Ministers down to the functionaries, with pure
 hearts reverence the Gods of Heaven and Earth, and one
 and all accepting the glad omen, make the Empire to
 flourish. "
    Again he commanded, saying:-
    " The provinces and districts in the four quarters having been
 placed in our charge by Heaven, We exercise suprenle rule
 over the Empire. N ow in the province of Anato, ruled over by
 Our divine ancestors, this auspicious omen has appeared. For
 this reason We proclaim a general amnesty throughout the
 Empire, and begin a new year-period, to be called Haku-chi. 6
 ~t{oreover \\Te prohibit the flying of falcons within the limits of
 the 'province of Anato."
    Presents were made to the Ministers, Daibu and officials of
 lower rank do,vn to the clerks, varying in value according to
 their rank. Hereupon the local Governor, Shikofu, I{usakabe

  I The characters are B    *, but \vhether the ~:mperor actually said lVijJjJun
or Va/nato is not quite clear. The interlinear gloss has Jlikaffo, \vhich is
absurd.
  ~ 6jin Tenno.                            3 Nintoku Tenno.

  4 The dragon-horse has \vings on its head.         I t crosses \vater \vithout
sinking. It appears ,vhen an illustrious sovereign is on the throne.
  a Kirin.                                  Ii \Vhite pheasant.
        J26                               NIHONGI.

         no Muraji, was commended and granted the rank of Daisen,
         together with liberal presents. The commuted taxes and
         corvees of Anato were ren1itted for three years.
             Summer, 4th month. Silla sent EnVO)TS to offer tribute.
                   One book says :-" In the reign of this Emperor the
               three countries of Koryo, Pekche and Silla sent Envoys
                bearing tribute every year."
xxv. 51. Winter, loth month. In respect of the tombs which had
         been demolished in order to include the ground in a site for a
         Palace, and of the people who had been made to remove for
         the same purpose, presents were given, varying in value. This
         having been done, the chief builder Hirafu Aratawi no Atahe,
         was sent to set up the boundary posts of the Palace.
             In this month the construction was begun of an embroidery 1
         figure of Buddha sixteen feet in height with its attendant
         Bosatsu,2 and of figures of beings of the eight classes 3-forty-
         six figures in all.
             In this year, Ohoguchi, Aya no Yamaguchi no Atahe, in
         obedience to an Imperial order, carved one thousand images of
         Buddha.
             Agata, Yamato no Aya no Atahe, Abumi, Shiragabe no
         IVI uraji, and Agura, Naniha no Kishi, were sent to the province
         of Aki to build two Pekche ships.
AD. 651.     2nd year, Spring, 3rd month, 14th day. The sixteen feet
         high embroidery figure of Buddha and the others were finished.
             15th day. The Empress Dowager invited the ten Buddhist
         professors 4 and prepared a maigre entertainment for them.
             6th month. Pekche and Silla sent Envoys to bring tribute
         and to offer presents.
             Winter, 12th month, last day. More than 2100 priests and
         nuns were invited to the Palace of Ajifu, and made to read the
         Issaikyo.a
          1   No doubt \vhat we call tapestry.           2   See above, XXI. 6.
          a The eight classes are described as I. Heaven; II. Dragons; III. Yasha,
        the Sanskrit Yaksha, a kind of demons; IV. Kentatsuba, the Sanskrit
        Gandharva, a kind of demons; V. Asura, the mightiest of all denlons ;
        VI. Karora, Sanskrit Garuda, a kind of monstrous bird; VII. Kinnara,
        Sanskrit Kimnara, doubtful (horned) spirits, the musicians of Kuvera;
        'TIll. Makoraka, Sanskrit Mahoraga, demons shaped like a boa.
          4 See above, xxv. 10.

          a The cOlnplete Buddhist canon as received in China. It consists of
                                   KOT01(U.                                 J26

    That night over 2700 lights \vere lit in the courtyard of the
 Palace, and there were caused to be read the Antaku and
 Dosoku 1 Sutras, etc. Upon this, the Emperor removed his
 residence from Oho-gohori to the ne\v Palace. It received the xxv. 52.
 name of the Palace of N aniha no Nagara no Toyosaki.
   This year the Silla tribute-envoys, Chi-man, of Sa-son rank,
 and his companions anchored at Tsukushi, wearing garments
 of the Thang country. The Government, disgusted at this
 wanton change of habit, reproved them and drove them back
 again. ,,-\t this time Kose no Oha-ami addressed the Emperor,
 saying :-" If we do not give a blow to Silla at this present time,
 we shall certainly' have to regret it afterwards. Now as to the
 manner of giving a blow to Silla, we can do so without raising a
 sword. 2 From the port of Naniha as far as Tsukushi let the
 surface of the sea be covered \vith ships, one touching another.
Then if Silla be summoned and called to an account for her
offences, it ,viII be easy for us to gain our object."
   3rd year, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. When the New A.D. 652.
Year's ceremonies ,vere over, the Imperial chariot proceeded to
the Palace of Oho-gohori.
   r""'rom the 1st month to the 2nd month the distribution of
rice-lands 3 had been brought to a close. As to the length 4 of
the rice-fields, thirt)~ paces made a tan, and ten tan a chu.
          The tax-rice ,vas one sheaf and a half per tan, or fifteen
       slleaves per cho.
   3rd month, 9th da~y. The Imperial chariot returned to the
Palace.
   5ummer, 4th month, 15th day. The Shaman,s Ye-un, ,vas
invited to the interior of the Palace and made to explain the

hundreds of vo}ulnes, and ,vas no doubt read by the lendoktt systetll, i.e. by
reading a few ,vords at the beg-inning and at the end of each volulue, turning
rapidly over the internlediate pages by a single Inotion of the 11and.
   1 These are not kno\vn as Sutras.       Probably they were litanies used as
suitable for the occasion of taking up a residence in the ne\v Palace. An-taku
Ineans "peaceful-house," and I)o-soku "earth-side," or perhaps "earth-
survey."
  2 The older reading is " without an effort." I follo\v the" Shiikai " editor's
elnendation of JJ for 11.                          3 See above, XXV. 17.

  4 The breadth is not stated llere.      Fronl other evidence it appears to
have been t",,-e]ve paces.
  a Sanskrit S'ranlana, Buddhist priests or ascetics. Ville Eitel, sub 7'0&(.
         J26                            N II-IONGI.
           Muryojiu 1 Sutra, the Shaman Ye-ji was made lecturer and
           1000 Shaman were constituted the audience.
              20th day. The explanations (of the Sutras) ,vas discontinued.
           From this day forward rain began to fall continually, lasting
           for nine days. It demolished buildings, and destroyed the
           young rice-plants in the fields. ~Iany men, horses and oxen
           were drowned.
xxv. 53·       In this month the registers of population \vere prepared.
           Fifty houses were made a township, and for each to\vnship
           there was appointed an elder. The senior member of the
           family 2 was always made the head of the household. The
           houses were all associated in groups of five for mutual protec-
           tion, \vith one elder to supervise them one with another.
               Silla and Pekche sent Envoys to bring tribute and offer
            presents.
               Autumn, 9th month. The building of the Palace was com-
            pleted. It is impossible adequately to describe the appearance
           of the Palace Halls.
               Winter, 12th month, last day. The priests and nuns of the
            Empire were invited to the interior of the Palace and enter-
            tained \vith meagre fare. Plentiful alms \vere given, and lights
            kindled.
 A.D. 653.     4th year, Sunlmer, 5th month, 12th day. There were sent
            to Great Thang, as Chief Ambassador, Kishi no Nagani, of
            Upper Shosen rank, as Associate Ambassador, I{ishi no I~oma
             (also called Ito] of Upper Shu-otsu rank, as Student Priests,
            Dogen, Dutsu, Dukwo, Yese, Gakusho, Benshu, Yeshu, Sunin,
,xxv. 54. Chiso, Doshu, Juye 3 ( ) oye was the eldest son of the 0 ho-omi
            of the Middle 4], Adachi [Adachi was the son of N akatomi no
           1  l.e. inlmortallife, called in Sanskrit the Sukh:tyatt Vyuha Sutra.
           2  i.e. the eldest son or heir, to the exclusion of uncles, say the COllunen-
         tators. This ,vould be prin1ogenlture. This principle had not yet become
         established for the succession to the throne.
            S There is a biography of Joye extant.        He relnained for luany years
         studying in China. On his return to Japan he had the body of his father
         removed from the old-fashioned dolnlen-tonlb in \vhich he llad been interred,
         and buried under a Ininiature pagoda of stone. This nlarks the decline of
         the old style of internlent. The original tOlnb is still in existence. It is
         sho\vn in the annexed illustration, \vhich is reproduced \vith the kind per-
          mission of the editor of the " Asiatic Quarterly Re,"ie\v," where it appeared,
          July, 189 2 •
            4 N aidaijin.
                                   KOTOKU.                             243
Kome no Muraji] and Dokwan                     D5kwan was        the son of



  і «/SVe V ' Ν '4*




                                                                              *с
                                                                              зr t
                                                                               Є
                                                                              д
                                                                               а7
                                                                              З
                                                                              W3
                                                                               0
                                                                               1-і
                                                                              ϋw
                                                                              ’с
                                                                              £
                                                                              З
                                                                              W3
                                                                              £
                                                                               0
                                                                              З1-і
                                                                              W3
                                                                               0
                                                                               -і
                                                                              11




Kudara, Kasuga no Ahata no Omi] as students,1 Kusuri, Kose
                      1   i.e. students of Chinese literature.
        244
        J26                             NIHONGI.

          no Omi [son of Toyotari no Omi] , and Okina, Hi no Muraj
          (son of 1fadama. Another book adds the student priests
         Chiben and Gitoku and the student Ihatsumi, Sakahibe no
          Muraji] ,in all 121 persons, who sailed together in the same
         ship. Mita, Nunobara no Obito, was appointed as envoy to
         accompany them. Again, the Chief Ambassador Nemaro
          [also called Yatsukahagi] , Takada no Obito, of Lo,ver Daisen
         rank, and the Associate Ambassador 'Vomaro, Kamori 1 no
          Muraji, of Upper Shu-otSll rank, with the student priests D6fuku
         and Giku, in all 120 persons, sailed together in one ship.
         Yatsute, Hashi no ~Iuraji, was appointed as Envoy to escort
         them.
            In this month the Emperor visited the chamber of the priest
         Bin, inquired after his illpess, and at length from his o\vn
         mouth delivered his gracious commands.
                 One book says :-" In the 7th month of the 5th year,
xxv. 55.      the priest Bin took ill in the Temple of Adzumi. There-
               upon the Emperor paid him a visit of inquiry', and taking
               him by' the hand, said :-' If your Reverence dies to-day,
              \Ve shall follo'v ~you in death to-morrow.'"
            6th month. Pekche and Silla sent Envoys bearing tribute
         and offering presents.
            The high\vay's of various places were repaired.
            The Emperor ,vas informed of the death of the priest Bin,
         and sent a messenger of condolence and also numerous
         presents.
            The Empress Do\vager, the Prince Imperial, etc., all sent
         messengers to offer condolences on the death of the priest Bin.
         Eventually the Emperor commanded Komaro, Koma no
         Tachibe, a painter, ,vith Funado no Atahe and others to make
         a large number of figures of Buddha and Bosatsu, to be placed
         in the Temple of Kahara [one book says they are in the Temple
         of Yamada-, .
            Autumn, 7th month. Takada no Nemaro and his colleagues,
         the Ambassadors sent to Great Thang, were drowned by the
         sinking of their ship in the Gate 2 of Takashima, off the coast
         of Satsuma. Onl)r five men who lashed themselves to a plank,
          1   See above, XXV. 45-
          ~ A narro\v passage between   two islands.   Or it filay 111ean the entrance
        to a harbour.
                               KOTOKU.                             245
floated ashore on the island of Takashima. They kne\v not
what to do, until one of the five, named Kadobe no Kogane,
gathered balnboos 1 and made of them a raft, with which they
anchored at the island of Shitoji.shima. These five men
passed six days and six nights without any food \vhatever.
Thereupon !{ogane was complimented (by the Emperor),
advanced in rank, and presents given him.
   This year the Prince Imperial petitioned the Emperor,
saying :-" I wish the Imperial residence were renloved to the
Yamato capital." The Emperor refused to grant his request.
Upon this the Prince Imperial took with him the Empress
Dowager, the Empress Hashibito, and the younger Imperial xxv. 6.
Princes, and went to live in the temporar.y Palace of Asuka no
Kahabe in Yamato. At this time the lVlinisters and Daibu,
with the various functionaries, all followed and changed their
residence~ The Emperor resented this, and wished to cast
away the national Dignity. He had a palace built in Yama-
zaki and sent a song to the Empress Hashibito, saying:-
                         The pony which I keep,
                         I put shackles on
                         And led it not out:
                         Can anyone have seen
                         The pony which I keep?

  5th year, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. In the night the rats A.D. 654.
migrated towards the Yamato capital.
  Nakatomi no Kamatari no Muraji ,vas granted the Shik\van,1
and his fief increased by a number of houses.
  2nd month. The Controlling Envoys sent to Great Thang,
namely, Kuromaro Takamuku no Obito, of Upper Daikin
rank [one book says :-" Summer, 5th month. There \vere sent
to Great Thang the Controlling Envoy Takamuku no Kuromaro,
of Lower Daikwa rank "~ , the Chief Ambassador l\laro, Kahabe
no Omi, of Lower Sh6kin rank, the Associate An1bassador
Kusushi :~ Yenichi, of Lower Daisen rank, the two Hangwan,
Maro Fumi no Atahe, of Upper Daiotsu rank, and Miyaji no
Amida [one book says:-"The Hangwan, Mara, Fumi no Atahe,
of Lower Sh6sen rank "], Yoroshi, Oka no !{imi, of Upper
 1   Takashilna ll1eans "bamboo island."          2   Or purple cap.
                                 3 Doctor.
        J26                             NIHONGI.

XX,T.57. Sho-otsu rank, Daihaku, Okizome no Muraji, O)'U, Nakatomi
       no Hashibito no Muraji, of Lower Sho-otsu rank, Tori, Tabe
       no Fubito, and others. They embarked separately on two ships.
       Having delayed for several months, they proceeded by \vay of
       Silla, and anchored at Laichou. 1 At last they reached the
       capital, where they had an audience of the Emperor. There-
       upon Kuo Wen-chii, superintendent of the guards of the Prince
       Imperial's Palace, inquired particularly of them regarding the
       geography of the Land of Japan, and the names of the Gods
       of the beginning of the country. To all which inquiries
       suitable answers were given.
          The Controlling Envoy Takamuku no Kuromaro died in
       Great Thang.        .
               Yuki no Hakatoko says :-" The student-priest Yemyo
            died in Thang; Chisu died at sea; Chikoku died at sea;
             Chiso 2 returned in a Silla ship in the year Kano)re Tara ~;
             Gakusho died in Thang; Gitsii died at sea; Joye returned
            in the year Kinoto Ushi 4 in the ship of Lin Teh..kao;);
             Myoi, Hoshu and the students Okina, Hi no Muraji and
             Ko Wo-gon, 6 twelve persons in all, with Kan Chiko and
             Cho Gempo, of foreign Japanese birth, came back this
            year along with the envoys."
          Summer, 4th month. Two men and two women of the
       Land of Tukhara'1 and one woman of S'ravastl: 8 were driven
       by a storm to Hiuga.
          Autumn, 7th month, 24th day. Kishi no Nagani and his
       colleagues, who had gone as Envoys to the \Vestern Sea, ~

          1   In Shantung.
          2   Spelt with a different Chinese character to the other.
           3 A.D. 690.               • A.D. 665.            5 Presulnably a Chinese.

           6 A Japanese who had taken a Chinese name.

           '1 The region round Badakshan in India. Vide Eitel, sub voce.
           S An ancient city of India situated near Sirkhee or F"uzabad.    Vide Eitel.
        It is absurd to speak of natives of India being cast ashore in Hiuga. It is
        plain from a c01l1parison of the passage in Book XXVI. 4, in which these
        persons are again referred to, that the place here called Tukhara is really the
        island of Tokara, one of the Loochoo group. The writer of the " Nihong-i,"
        however, shows by the characters with ,vhich he writes the name, and by
        his poetic license of associating S'ravasti with it, that he was thinking of
        the Indian locality. The native conlnlentators follow him in this.
           9 China.
                           KOTOKU.                  247
anchored in Tsukushi \\~ith Escorting Envoys from Silla and
pekche. This month the Emperor commended the Envoys to xxv. 58,
the Western Sea for having had a personal audience of the
Emperor of the Thang country~, and for having obtained
numerous books and precious objects. He bestowed on the
Chief Ambassador Kishi no Nagani, of Upper Shusen rank,
the lower grade of Shokwa rank, and granted him a fief of 200
houses with the name of the Kure House. On the Associate
Ambassador, Kishi no Kama, of Lo\ver Sho-otsu rank, there
was besto\ved the upper grade of the Shosen rank
   Winter, loth month, 1st da)~. The Prince Imperial, being
informed that the Emperor had taken ill, proceeded to the
N aniha Palace \vith the Empress Do\vager, the Empress
Hashibito, and also accompanied by the younger Imperial
Princes and the Ministers.
   loth day. The Emperor died in the State Bedchamber.
 He was temporarily interred in the southern courtyard.
 Dotoko, Mozu no Hashi no Muraji, of Upper Shosen rank,
superintended the business of the Palace' of Temporary
 Interment.
   12th month, 8th day. He was buried in the misasagi of
 Shinaga at Ohosaka. 1
   On this day, the Prince Imperial, accompanied by the
Empress Do\\rager, changed his residence to the Temporary
Palace of Kahabe in Yamato. Old people said :-" The
migration of the rats to the Yamato capital was an omen of
the transference of the capital thither."
   In this year, Koryo, Pekche and Silla sent ambassadors of
condolence.
                 1   In the province of Kahachi.
                                    BOOK XXVI.

          THE EMPRESS AME-TOYO-TAKARA IKASHI-HI TARASHI-HIME.



                                (SA/MEll          TENNO.)

        THE       Empress Ame..toyo-takara ikashi-hi tarashi-hime first
          married the Emperor Tachibana no toyohi's 2 grandson, Prince
          Takamuku, and bore to him the Imperial Prince Aya. She
          was afterwards married to the Emperor Oki-naga tarashi-hi
          hiro-nuka,3 to whom she bore two sons and one daughter. In
          his second year she was raised to the rank of Empress-consort,
          as may be seen in the history of the Emperor Oki-naga tarashi-
          hi hiro-nuka. In the thirteenth year of his reign, 'Vinter, the
          tenth month, the Emperor Oki-naga tarashi-hi hiro-nuka died.
          In the first month of the following year the Empress assumed
          the Imperial Dignity. In the sixth month of the fourth year
          of the new reign, she resigned the Dignity to the Emperor
          Ame..yorodzu-toyo-hi, and was entitled Empress Dowager. The
          Emperor Ame-yorodzu-toyohi died in the tenth month of the
          later fifth year!
A.D. 655.    1st year, Spring, 1st month, 3rd day. The Empress
          Dowager assumed the Imperial Dignity in the Palace of Asuka
          no Itabuki.
            .Summer, 5th month, 1St day. In the midst of the Void 5
          there was seen one riding on a dragon, who resembled a man

              1  Uniform-bright. The Elnpress Kogyoku restored.
              2  Yomei Tenno.                              a Jomei Tenno.
              .. i.e. the later of the two year-periods of his reign, viz. Hakuchi.
              5 Sora.     To be distinguished from Ten, heaven or firmament.
                              SAI~IEI.                                 249
of Thang in appearance. He had on a broad hat of green
oiled stuff. He rode fast from the peak of Katsuraki and XXVI. 2.
disappeared. on Mount Ikoma. When it became noon, he
galloped off over the firs of Sumiyoshi in a westerly direction.
    Autumn, 7th month, 11th day. There were entertained at
the Court of Naniha of the Northern Yemishi ninety-nine
persons, and of the Eastern Yemishi ninety-five persons. At
the same time entertainment was provided for IS0 persons \vho
came as tribute envoys from Pekche. Caps of honour, of two
grades in each case, were bestowed on nine Yemishi of Kikafu 1
and on six Yemishi of Tsugaru. 2
    8th month, 1st day.      Mara, Kahabe no Omi, and others
 returned from Great Thang.
    Winter, loth month, 13th day. There \vas a Palace in
 course of construction at Woharida which it was intended to
 roof with tiles. Rut in the recesses of the mountains and on
 the broad valleys, much of the timber with \vhich it \vas
 proposed to erect the Palace buildings rotted.           In the
 end the work was put a stop to, and no building was
 erected. 3
    This winter the Palace of Asuka no Itabuki " \vas burnt, and
 the Empress therefore removed her residence to the Palace of
 Asuka no Kahara. 5
    This year Koryo, Pekche and Silla sent Envoys together to
 offer tribute.
         The Pekche Chief Ambassador was Talsol of the
       Vlestern division, by name Yo-wi-syu; the Associate
       Ambassador was an Eunsol of the Eastern division, by
       name Tyo-sin-in. There were over one hundred persons
       altogether.
     Yemishi and Hayato/ attended by a large number of fol-
  lowers, offered homage and came to Court with presents for
  the Empress.
   1   In Mutsu.                                     2   In l\tutsu.
   3  This shows that roofing with tiles was considered an innovation. To
 this day the shrines of Ise have not tiled roofs.
   4 Ita-buki lneans shingle-roofed.

   [) This name is written with characters which luean river-bed. But
 kahara also means tiles, which in this connection does not seenl a mere
 fortuitous coincidence.
   I) See Vol. I. p. 100.
         J26                               NIl-lONGI.

             Silla sent specially Mi-mu of Keup-son 1 rank as a hostage,
          and twelve men as skilled workmen.
             Mi-mu fell ill and died.
             This year was the )Tear Kinota U (S2nd) of the Cycle.
A.D. 656.
XXVI. 3.     2nd year, Autumn, 8th month, 8th day. Koryn sent Tal-sa
          and others to offer tribute.        [The Chief Ambassador \vas
          Talsa, and the Associate Ambassador I-Ii-chi. There were
          eighty-one persons in all.~
             9 th month. There \vere sent to Koryo, as Chief Ambassador,
          I-Iatsumi, Kashihade no Omi, and as Associate Ambassador
          Ihasuki, Sakahibe no Muraji, as Senior Hangwan, Shiromaro,
          Inugami no Kimi, as Second Class Hangwan, Kahachi no
          Fumi 110 Obito, and as Junior 3 Hangwan, Mara, Ohokura no
          Kinunuhi no Miyakko.
             In this year a fresh site for a Palace was fixed upon at Asuka
          no Wokamoto.
             At this time, Roryo, Pekche and Silla together sent envoys
          to offer tribute. Dark purple curtains ,vere drawn round this
          Palace site for them, and they ,,,ere entertained there. At last
          the Palace buildings were erected, and the Empress removed
          into them. This Palace was called the later Palace of Asuka
          no Wokamoto.
             Tamu Peak was crowned with a circular enclosure. ~fore­
          over on the summit of the Peak, close by where two tsuki trees
          grew, a lofty building was erected to which the name was given
          of the Palace of Futa-tsuki. 4 It was also called An1atsu ~ miya.
             At this time public works were in favour. Navvies 6 were
          employed to dig a canal from the western end of Mount Kagu
          yama as far as the Mountain of Iso no kami. Two hundred

           ) Ninth of the seventeen grades.                    ~   Including artists.
           ;~ For Junior (Il,) the interlinear gloss is Sunai.       Ohoi and Sunai were
         respectively the Japanese tenns applied to Senior and Junior degrees of
         rank. Sunai vlould therefore appear to be abbreviated from sukunaki,
         \vhich now means fe\v, scanty, but which anciently lneant also small, as in
         the case of the dwarf god Sukuna-bikona. Cf. Corean chak-eun, small.
         :Fr0111 this it \vould appear that the colloquial abbreviation of the tennination
         of the adjective had already COIlle into use when these glosses \vere added-
          ong after the time of the" Nihongi."
            " i.e. the two tsuki trees.                 5 Palace of Heaven.

               Lit. " ,vater workluen," a closely parallel expression to our" navigators ,:
             " navvies," ,\those original business it was to dig canals.
                               SAIMEI.                              J26

 bar~es ,verc loaded with stones from the Iso no Kan1i ~loun- XXVI. 4.
 tain and hauled ,vith the current to the mountain on the east of
the Palace, ,vhere the stones 'Ivere piled up to form a wall.
 The people of that da)T reviled the \vork, saying :-" This mad
 canal, ,,,hich has ,Yasted the labour of over 30,000 men! This
 \vall-building, ,vhich has "oasted the labour of over 70,000 men!
 And the timber for the Palace \vhich has rotted! 1 And the
top of the mountain ,vhich has collapsed! "
   Again they reviled, saying :-" May the mound built at Iso
no kami break down of itself as fast as it is built!          (This
                                                              P


abuse \vas probably uttered ,,,hile the work ,vas incomplete.]
   A Palace ,vas also built at Yoshino.
   The Ambassadors to the Western Sea/ Takunaha, Saheki
no Muraji, and I~unikatsu, Naniha no Kishi, of Lo,ver Shosen
rank, ,,,ith their companions returned from Pekche and pre-
sented the Empress with a parrot.
                       'V
   The Palace of okamoto took fire.
   3rd y'ear, Autumn, 7th month, 3rd day. T\vo men and fOUf A.De 657-
\vornen of the Land of Tukhara ;; who had drifted to Tsukushi,
said :-" 'Ve first of all drifted to the island of Amami." 4 So
they were sent for by post-horses.
   15th day'. A model of Mount Sumi a \vas constructed to the
west of the Temple of Asuka-dera. Moreover the festival of
All Souls It \\yas held. In the evening the people from Tukhara
,vere entertained. [One book says, "the people of l"ora."]
   9th month. The Imperial Prince Arima 7 \-vas of a deceitful
disposition, and pretended insanity', etc., etc. He went to the
hot baths of Muro,8 under the pretence of treatment of disease.
On his return he praised the quality of the country, say'ing:-
"Scarce had I seen that region, when my complaint disap-
peared of itself," etc., etc. The Empress, hearing this, was
rejoiced, and ,vished to go and visit it.                           XXVI. s.
   This year envoy's were sent to Silla \vith the following mes-

  I   See above, XX\'"'I. 2.   2   China.      :1   See above, XX". 57.
  .. Now called Amami no Ohoshima, or oftener simply Ohoshima.       The
chief northern island of the Loochoo group.
  ;) Sanskrit, Sumeru or Meru.
  Ii Urabonye, in Sanskrit Ullalnbana, called by Europeans the Feast of
Lanterns.
  i Son of Kotoku Tenn6.                        ~ In Kil.
         J26                             NIIIONGI.

           sage :-" "Ve \vish to send to Great Thang under the charge of
           your country's envoys the Buddhist priest Chitatsu, Mimiimaya,
           Hashibito no Muraji, and Wakugo, Yozami no l\1uraji." Silla
           refused to grant such escort, and therefore the Buddhist priest
           Chitatsu and his colleagues returned.
              The Arrlbassadors to the Western Sea, Tsuratari, Adzumi no
           Muraji, of Lower Sho-k,va rank, and Kutsuma, Tsu no Omi, of
           Lower Sh6sen rank, returned from Pekche. They brought
           presents for the Empress of one camel and t\VO asses.
              The people of Ihami said that a ,vhite fox 1 had been seen.
A.D. 65 8•    4th year, Spring, 1St month, 13th day. I{ose no Tokuda no
           Omi, Oho-omi of the Left, died.
              Summer, 4th month. Abe no Omi went on an expedition
           against the Yemishi in command of a fleet of 180 ships. The
           Yemishi of the t\\'o districts of Aita 2 and N ushiro 2 \vere struck
           with fear, and tendered their submission. Hereupon the ships
           were drawn up in order of battle in the bay of Aita. A Yemishi
           of Aita named Omuka came for\vard and made an oath, say-
           ing :-" It is not by reason of the arrival of the Imperial forces
           that we slaves carry bows and arrows, but because it is our
           nature to live upon animal food. If we have provided bows
            and arrows against the Imperial forces, may the Gods of the
            bay of Aita take note of it! \Ve 'Yill serve the Government
            with pure hearts."
              Omuka was accordingly granted the rank of Upper Sho-otsu,
            and local governors were established in the t,vo districts of
            Nushiro and Tsugaru. Ultimately the Yenlishi of Watari no
            Shima 3 were summoned together at the shore of Arima and a
XXVI. 6. great feast provided them, after which they \vere dismissed
            home.
              5th month. A grandson of the Empress named Prince
            Takeru died. He was eight years of age. His remains were
            deposited in a temporary tomb which was raised for him over

           1 A good Olnen.   Perhaps they expected a relnission of their taxes, as ,,"as
         the case when a \vhite pheasant was reported from the adjoining province
         of Anato.
           2 District of Akita, province of Deba.     The former place is also read
         Agida. I t is probably identical with the present Akita.
           3 By Watari no Shima, "the island of the crossing, or ferry," is no doubt

         meant the island of Yeza. Arima cannot be identified.
                                  SAI~fEI.                                 253
the Imaki valley. The Empress had alwa)!s esteemed her
grandson highly for his obedient conduct. She was therefore
beside herself \vith grief, aud her emotion ,vas exceeding great.
Sending for the Ministers, she said : -
  "After ten thousand years and a thousand autumns 1 he
must be interred along with us in our own misasagi."
  So she made songs, saying : -
                         On the Hill of Vv Offiure ::
                                             T



                         In 11naki-
                         If but a cloud
                         Arose, plain to be seen,
                         \Vhy should I lalnent?
  This was the first song.
                         I never thought
                         That he \vas young:J
                         As the young grass
                         By the riverside whither one tracks
                         The deer \\90unded by an arro\v.
  l"'his '\"as the second song.
                          Like the flowing water
                          Of the River Asuka
                          \\Thich surges as it flo\\'s,
                          Unceasingly
                          I long for him!
  This ,vas the third song.
  The Empress sang these songs from time to time, and
lamented bitterly.
  1   A Chinese expression for the date of the death of an Elnperor.
  2 A native commentator remarks that ll1ure is the Corean word for nloun-
tain. W omure would therefore nlean little-nlount. There ,vere Corean
settlers in Inlaki. The modern Corean word for nlountain is moi, \vhich is,
no doubt, a contraction of mure. Cf.       nc
                                          (nai) for nari or nare, river. As
sho\vn by Chanlberlain in his Loochooan Gralnmar, "T.A.S.]." XXI I I.
Suppleluent, Loochooan resembles modern Corean in dropping r in \vords
\vhere this letter is retained in Japanese. An example quoted by hiJn is
Loochooan luui, a wood, for Japanese mori. I suspect that the Loochooan
mui, \vood, the Japanese mori, ,vood, and the Corean 1110i, 1110untain, are
identical roots.
  The sense of the poem is that the Empress would try to console herself
with the ilnagination that a cloud over the young" Prince's tonlb \vas hi
representatI \'e.
   3 He was ,vise beyond his years.

  VOL. II.                                                             s
         254
         J26                             NIHONGI.

          Autumn, 7th n10nth, 4th day. More than t\VO hundred
       Yemishi can1e to Court with presents for the Empress. The
       entertainment and largess to them was on a more liberal scale
       than usual. Two Yemishi of Kikafu received one grade of
       rank.     Saniguna, the Senior Governor of the district of
XXVI 7 Nushiro, was made Lo\ver Sho-otsu (one book sa)·s ,vas granted
       t,vo steps in rank and given the superintendence of the
       population (register)], the Junior Governor Ubasa received the
       rank of Kembu, and t,vo brave men received one grade of rank.
       In addition there ,vere given to Saniguna and the others twenty
       cuttle-fish flags,l two drums, t,vo sets of bows and arrows, and
       t,vo suits of armour. ~famu, the Senior Goyernor of the
       district of Tsugaru, ,vas granted the rank of Upper Dai-otsu,
       A\vohiru, the Junior Goyernor, the rank of Lo\ver Sho-otsu,
       and t\\'o brave men received a step in rank. In addition there
       vvere granted to 1famu and the others t\venty cuttle-fish flags,
       t\VO drums, t,vo sets of bo\vs and arro\vs, and t,,·o suits of

       armour. T"vo grades of rank \vere conferred on the ~Iiyakko
       of the barrier of Tsukisara, and one grade on the Hang\van~
       Inadzumi Ohoton1o no I\.imi, ~Iiyakko of the barrier of N utari,
       received the rank of Lo\yer Shc)-otsu. l\Ioreover Sanaguna,2
       Senior Governor of the district of Nushiro, \vas comnlanded by
       the Empress to investigate the Yemishi population and the
       captive population.
          In this month, the Buddhist priests Chitsu and Chitatsu
       \vent by the Empress's command to Great Thang on board a
       Silla ship, where they' received instruction from the teacher of
       religion/ HSiian-ts'ang, on the philosopllY of things \vithout life
       and living beings. 4

          1   So called because the top ,vas in this shape.
          ~   Same as Saniguna, lnentioned above.
           ;I Hoshi=    DJ). This is the fanlous Buddhist priest (also called Yuan . .
        ch\van) \vho left China for India in A.D. 6::!9, in fulfihnent of a "O\v. After
        an absence of seyenteen years he returned in A.D. 645, bringing \vith hini
        657 vohnncs of the Buddhist scriptures, besides ntllnerous sacred relics.
        The record of his travels has been translated by Stanislas Julien under the
        title of h Histoire de la vie de Hiollen-tsang et de ses voyages dans l'Inde."
        Mayers, p. 290.
           4 Another ,vork states that Chitsll \vent to "fhang to obtain instructl0n

        respecting the Greater Vehicle (Mahayana). No doubt Bllddhisln g-enerally
        is meant by the expression in the text.
                                  SAI:\lEI.                             255
  Winter, loth month, 15th day. The Empress visited the
hot baths of Ki. The Empress, remembering her Imperial
grandson, Prince Takeru, grieved and lamented. She exclaimed, XXVI. 8
saying : -

                    'Though I pass over the nlountains
                    And cross the seas
                    Yet can I never forget
                    The pleasant
                    Region of Imaki.
                                              The first.

                    With the harbour's
                    Ebbing tide,
                    As the sea goes down,
                    With the darkness behind Ine
                    Leaving him, I lnust go-
                    'The dear one.
                    lVi y young child!
                    Leaving him, I must gO.1
                                              The second


   She commanded Mari, Hada no Oho-kura no Miyakko, say-
ing :-" Let these verses be handed down and let theITI not be
forgotten by the world."
   11th month, 3rd day. Saga no Akaye no Omi, the official
who had charge during the Empress's absence, addressed the
Imperial Prince Arima, saying :-" There are three faults in the
Empress's administration of the affairs of Government. The
first is that she builds treasuries on a great scale, \vherein she
collects the riches of the people. The second is that she wastes
the public grain revenue in digging long canals. The third is
that she loads barges with stones and transports them to be
piled up into a hill." 2 The Imperial Prince Arima, recognizing
Akaye's friendly disposition towards himself, was gratified, and
replied, saying :-., I have only now come to an age \vhen I am
fit to bear arms."
   5th day. The Imperial Prince Arima proceeded to the house
of Akaye, where he went up into an upper storey, and conspired

       1   Some editions 111ake the last three lines a distinct poeln
       ~   See above, XXVI. 4·
         J26                             NIHONGI.

        with hinl.   A leg-rest 1 broke of itself. They both recognized
                                          that this was a bad omen, and
XXVI. 9.

                        f                 swore to one another to proceed
                                          no further. The Imperial Prince
                                          returned home, where he was
                                          staying for the night, when at
                                          midnight Akaye sent Shibi,
                                          Mononobeno Yenowi no 1furaji,
                                          in command of the labourers
                                          engaged in building the Palace,
                     Ky6soku.             to surround the Imperial Prince
                                          Arima in his house at I-chifu,
         and straightway despatched a mounted courier to inform the
         Empress.
            9th day. The Imperial Prince Arima, with Oho-ishi, Mori
         no Kimi, Kusuri, Sakahibe no Muraji, and Konoshiro, Shihoya
         no Muraji, were arrested, and sent to the hot springs of Ki.
         His toneri Yonemaro, Nihitabe 2 no Muraji, follo\\Ted him.
            Thereupon the Prince Imperial in person questioned the
         Imperial Prince Arima, saying :-" Why didst thou plot
         treason? " He answered and said :-" Heaven and Akaye
         know. I do not at all understand."
            11th day. Kuniso, Tajihi no Wosaha no Muraji, was sent to
         strangle the Imperial Prince Arima at the Fuji$hiro acclivity.
         On this day Konoshiro, Shihoya no Muraji, and the toneri
         Yonemaro, Nihitabe no Muraji, were executed at the Fujishiro
         acclivity. When Konoshiro, Shihoya no Muraji, was about to
         be executed, he said :-" I request that my right hand may be
         made a national treasure." Oho-ishi, Mori no Kimi, was
         banished to the province of Kamitsukenu,3 and Kusuri, Sakahibe
         no Muraji, to the province of Wohari.
           1 The Chinese characters nlean " something- inserted between the knees,"

         in hot weather, when in bed, for coolness. A pillow is used for this pur-
         pose at Sinf.{apore, \vhere it is called" a Dutch wife." The corresponding
         Chinese term nleans "a banlboo wife." But the Japanese interlinear gloss
         ha.s oshimadzuki, sOlnething l\7hich is usualJy put for a sort of stool to lean
         the arm on when sitting on the mats, also called kyosoku. The "Wamyosho"
         has also oshimadzuki, but this word has probably a wider meaning, and
         includes both objects. See illustration.
            2 Or Nittabe.

            3 Now K6dzuke.
                                  SAI!\fEI.                                J26

         One book say's :-" The Imperial Prince Arima, ,vith
      Akaye, Saga no ami, Konoshiro, l Shihoya no 11uraji,
      Oho-ishi, 1Iori no Kimi, and Kusuri, Sakahibe no 1\1uraji,
      divined the future of their treasonous conspiracy' by drav~"-
      ing slips of paper." One book says :-" The Imperial XXVI. 10,
      Prince Arima said :-' First of all we will burn the Palace.
      Then \vith five hundred men for a day and t\VO nights ,ve
      will wayla)~ (the Empress) at the harbour of ~Iuro, and
      speedily \vith a fleet cutting off the Land of Ahaji, make as
      it were a prison. This can be easily accomplished.' Some
      one objected, saying :-' It cannot be so. For all ~rour
      plans, the faculty (of carrying them out) is wanting. At
      the present time, Your Imperial Highness is only nineteen
      years of ag-e, and has not ~yct attained to manhood. YOll
      must first reach manhood and then you \vill gain the
      faculty.' "   Another book says :-" \Vhen the Imperial
      Prince Arima \vas plotting treason along \vith a judicial
      officer, the leg of the Imperial Prince's arm-rest broke of
      itself without cause, but he did not cease from consDiring,
      and was eventually' executed."
  In this year, Hirafu, Abe no Hikida no Omi, \Varden of the
Land of Koshi, ,vent on an expedition against the Sn-shen.!
He presented to the Emperor two live white bears. 3

   1 The "Shftkai~' is clearly right in thinking that ~ of the text is a

Inistake for f-e. The name is therefore Konoshiro, as above, and not
Wohoko.
   ~ See above, \r 01. I I. p. 58. It Inay be inferred from the narrati ve given
belo\\', XXVI. 16, that the Manchus here referred to were not resident
on the ll1ainland, but occupied a trading-post in' Yezo or SOBle of the
adjoining islands.
   3 The character used here, viz. 'A,    is read shigulna by the Japanese, and
the description of this animal given in Yaluada's dictionary and in the
" Sansaidzuye" refers plainly to the Polar Bear. Dickins, in Murray's
"Handbook of Japan," sars that the Polar Bear is sometilnes found on the
shores of the Hokkaido, but it is rare. Seventy       A    skins are luentioned
below (XXVI. IS), a number \vhich makes one suspect that the animal here
referred to Inay be after all not the Polar Bear, but the U rsus Arctos, a
large bro\vn bear which abounds in all these northern reglons frolll \T czo to
Kanltchatka, and \vhich is quite distinct frOln the much smaller black bear of
the Japanese islands. I t is possible, however, that the Polar Bear may have
been more abundant in VezD at this time.
            J26                              N IIJON(;Y.
               The Buddhist priest Chiyu 11lade a south-pointing chariot. 1
                                                  I t was reported from
                                                the province of Idzumo : -
                                                "On the shore of the
                                               northern sea the fish are
                                               dying in heaps three feet
                                               in depth. In size they
                                               resemble the globe-fish. 2
                                               They have the beaks of
                                               sparrows and thorny scales
                                               several inches long. The
                                               common people say that
                                               they are sparro\vs \vhich
                                               have gone into the sea and
                                               become changed into fish,
                                               and give them the name
                                               of ' sparro\v-fish.' "
                                                        One book sa~ys:­
                                                     " In the seventh nlonth
                                                     of the sixth year,
                                                     Pekche sent Envoys
                    South-pointing Chariot.
                                                     \vith the following
                message to the Empress :-' Great Thang and Silla have
XXVI. I I       joined their powers for an attack upon us. They have
                taken a\vay as prisoners King Wicha, his Queen':~ and the
                Heir to the Throne. Our Government has therefore
                stationed troops on the north-western frontier and repaired

               1 i.e. a cOlllpass. For some curious learning about the COlllpass, vide" The

            Night of the (;ods," Vol. I. p. 97.. hy John O'Neill. Tradition says that a
            south-pointing chariot was Inade in the days of the Emperor Hoang, so that
            his troops nlight find their \vay surely in foggy \veather. Ville Mayers, p
            21, where the tradition of a south-pointing chariot being n1ade in B.C. I I 10
            is referred to.
               :? The Tetraodon Hyxtris, or fugu, a poisonolls fish, ,vhich has the power

            of puffing out its belly, a kind of globe-fish. There is a pretty conflict of
            authority as to the fish intended by    !€i,   the character here used. One
            Japanese dictionary gives same or shark, and hata, the terranllS 111oara, \vhile
            the interlinear gloss is yebi or prawn.
               3 The interlinear version has Koniworu for Queen, and Konikishi for

            Heir to the Throne. I cannot identify these with 'any Inodern Corean
            words.
                                  SAI~IEI.                                 259
     the fortifications as an indication that the mountains and
     rivers are blocked.' " 1
   Moreover Tsuratari, Adzumi no ~luraji, of Lo\ver Sh5k\\"a
rank, ,,,ho had gone as Envoy to the \Vestern Sea, returned
from Pekche and reported that Pekchl: had returned after a
successful expedition against Silla. At this time a horse of his
own accord \vent round the Golden Hall 2 of a temple night
and day ,vithout ceasing, and onl.y stopping to graze.
       One book says :-" This ,vas an echo 3 of its destruction
     oy the enemy in the year Kanoye Saru." ..
  5th year, Spring, 1st month, 3rd day. The Empress arrived A.D. 659
from the hot springs of I{i.
   3rd month, 1st day. The Elnpress visited Yoshino a and
held a banquet there.
   3rd day. The Empress visited Hira-ura in Afumi.
   loth day. The man of Tukhara Ii ,vith his \vife, a woman
of S'ravasti, arrived.
   17th day. A ~Iount Sumi ,vas constructed on the river-bank
east of Amakashi no Oka, and the Yemishi of 1\Iichinoku and
Koshi ,vere entertained.

   1 '[his entry cOlnes in a \vrong place. Pckche"s destruction took place later
-in A.D. 660. Vide" Tong-kaln," VII. 25.
   2 The Hall in ,"hich the ilnage of Buddha is enshrined.        'The Chinese
characters for ",,,ent round j' are fj ii, a tern1 \vhich is applicable to any
religious procession. Hut doubtless the interlinear gloss Iraeguri, "to go
round," is right here. It is clearly a case of religious circulnalnbulation.
This tenn is also applied to the" orbit " of heavenly bodies.
   'The Inore usual characters for h circulnan1bulation " are    Vi •.      The
Sanskrit ,\'ord is pradakchina, \vhich is defined by Eitel as "the (Brahn1anic
and Buddhist) ceren10ny of circulnalnbulating a holy object \vith one's right
side turned to it.;' This practice is still kept up. H.ockhill mentions it in
his tra\"els in Thibet, and during Lord Duffenn's viceroyalty of India, Lady
Dufferin \\'as on one occasion "circulnambulated" by sOlne tribesmen as a
Inark of the very highest respect.
   3 •
     l.e. an 01l1en.
   4 A.D. 660.    Under this year, the" Tongkam~; ha~ the following :--" The
wells in the H.oyal capital of Pekche turned red as blood, nlultitudes of fish
on the coast of the \\r estern Sea died, so that the people could not eat theIn,
and the \vaters of a river turned red like blood.;J
   5 A beautiful spot in Southern Yamato.     See Murray·s ''; Handbook," 3rd
ed. p. 336, et seqq.
   6 See above, XXV. 57.
         260
         J26                               NIHONGI.

             In this month, Abe no Omi was sent in command of 180
          ships on an expedition against the Yemishi country. Abe no
           Omi assembled a selection of the Yenlishi of the two districts
          of Akita and Nushiro to tIle number of 241 persons with 31 of
XXVI. 12. their captives, 112 Yemishi of the district of Tsugaru with 4
          captives, and 20 Yemishi of Ifurisahe, in one place, feasted
          them and gave them presents.
             Accordingly he made an offering to the Gods of that Land
          of a boat and silk stuffs of various colours, and proceeded to
          Shishiriko. Then two Yemishi of Tohiu, named Ikashima
          and Uhona, came forward and said :-" You ought to make
          Shiribeshi 1 your seat of Government." In accordance with
          the advice of Ikashima and his companion, a district-governor
          was ultimately established there, after which he (Abe no Omi)
          returned. The provincial governors of Michinoku and Koshi
          were each granted two grades of rank, while the district-
          governors and administrators received each one degree.
                  One book says :-" Hirafu, Abe no Hikida no Omi,.
               fought with the Su-shen, and on his return presented to
               the Empress forty-nine captives."
            Autumn, 7th month, 3rd day. Ihashiki, Sakahibe no Muraji,
          of Lower Shokin rank, and Kiza, Tsumori no Muraji, of Lower
          Daisen rank, were sent on a mission to the Land of Thang.
          They took with them a Yemishi man and woman of Michinoku
          to show to the Thang Emperor.
                  In the writing of Hakatoko, Yuki no Muraji, it is.
               stated :-" In the reign of this Empress, Sakahibe no
               Ihashiki no Muraji, of Lower Sh6kin rank, Tsumori no
               Kiza no Muraji, of Lower Daisen rank, and others, in two
               ships, received orders to go on a mission to Thang of Wu. 2
               In the year Tsuchinoto Hitsuji (659), the 7th month, and
               the 3rd day of the month, they started from the Bay of
               Mitsu in Naniha. On the I rth day of the 8th month,
               they left the Bay of OhotSll:1 in Tsukushi. On the 13th
               day of the 9th month, they arrived at an island on the
               southern border of pekche. The name of the island is not
XXVI. 13.      known. At four a.m. on the 14th, the two ships put out
               to sea in company. On the 15th day, at sunset, the ship
           1   On the west coast of Vezo.
           2   Wu is here a geographical designation.   :-I   Hakata in Chikuzen..
                            SAl~·IEI.                          261

    of Ihashiki no Muraji ll1et crosswise with a contrary wind
    and was driven to an island in the Southern Sea, named
    Erh-kia-\vei, where it was destroyed by the islanders.
    Arima, Yamato no Aya no \Vosa no Atahe, with Inadzumi,
    Sakahibe no Muraji, and three others, stole a ship belonging
    to the islanders, and embarking in it, escaped to Kwa-
    chow. The officials of this district sent them under escort
    to the capital, Loh-yang. At midnight on the 16th day,
    the ship of Kiza no l\furaji arrived at Mount Hsu-an near
    Kuei-chi in the Yueh district,l \vhen a north-east wind
    sprang up and blew with such violence that on the 23rd
    they reached the district of Yii-yao. The great ship on
    which they were embarked, with all its gear, was left behind
    at this place, and on the 1st day of the 11th intercalary
    month, they arrived at the seat of Government of the
    Yueh district. On the 15th they entered the capital/
    riding on post-horses. On the 29th, travelling with all
    speed, they reached the Eastern capital,J where the
    Emperor had then his residence. On the 30th they had
    an audience of the Enlperor, who inquired of them, say-
    ing :-" Is the Empress of your country in good health? "
    The Envoys answered respectfully :-" Her virtue is in
    harnlony with Heaven and Earth, and she therefore
    naturally enjoys good health." The Emperor inquired of
    them :-" And the Ministers in charge of affairs-is it well
    with them?" The Envoys answered respectfully :-" As
    they enjoy the favour and esteem of our Empress, it is XXVI. 14.
    well with them also." The Emperor inquired of them,
    saying :-" Is there peace within your country or not?"
    The Envoys answered respectfully, saying :-" The Govern-
     ment accords with Heaven and Earth, and therefore there
     is nothing untoward among the multitude." The Em-
     peror inquired of them, saying :-" In what quarter is the
     Land of these Yemishi situated?" The Envoys answered
     respectfully, saying :-" I t lies to the north-east." The
     Emperor inquired of ·them, saying :-" How many tribes
     of Yemishi are there?" The Envoys answered respect-
     fully, saying :-" There are three kinds. The most distant
     are called Tsugaru, the next Ara-Yemishi, and the nearest
1   Chekiang.       ~   Nanking.        3   Lohyang, near Honanfu.
            J26                            NIIIONGI.

                  Nigi-YemishLl These now here are N igi- Yemishi-they
                  bring tribute year!)' to our country's Court." The Em-
                  peror inquired of them, saying :-" In their country are
                  there the five kinds of grain?" The Envoy·s answered
                  respectfully, saying :--" No, they sustain life by eating
                  flesh ?~' The Emperor inquired of them, saying :-" Have
                  they houses in their country?" The Envoys answered
                  respectfully, saying :-" No, they have their dwelling
                  under trees in the recesses of the mountains." l"'he
                  Emperor went on to say :-" When We look at the
                  unusual bodily appearance of these Yemishi, it is strange
                  in the extreme. You Envoys must have suffered greatly
                  on your long voyage hither. Now retire and abide in
                  ~your official residence. We shall meet again." On the
                  1st day of the 11th month the festival of the Winter
                  Solstice was celebrated at Court. On the festival day,
                  they again saw the Emperor. Amongst the various frontier
                  states who attended the Court, the Japanese 2 visitors
                  were the most distinguished. Thereafter, by reason of
                  the confusion caused by a conflagration, the matter was
                  neglected and not further attended to. On the 3rd
                  day of the 12th month, Kahachi no Aya no Ohomaro, a
                  servant of Han Chi-hung, slandered our visitors, ,vho were
                  found guilty by the Court of Thang, and were already
                  condemned to banishment. Previously Chi-hung was
                  banished to a distance of 3000 Ii. Among the visitors was
                  one, Hakatoko, Yuki no Muraji, who made representations
                  to the Emperor in consequence of which their punishment
                  was remitted. When everything was concluded, the
                  Enlperor decreed as follows :-" This Government has
                  determined next year to take administrative measures in
                  regard to the lands east of the sea, 3 and you, the visitors
                  from Wa, may not return to the east." In the end they
XXVI. IS.         were detainee} in the Western capital." They were placed
               I Ara and Nigi mean respectively rough and soft or gentle. The reference
            is to their greater or less degree of civilization. The Vezo Ainos are not
            mentioned.
               2 The character used is ~,i.e. \Va, but possibly the writer Ineant it to

            be read Yamato.
               3 The campaign against Pekche is no doubt Ineant.

               • Feng-hsiang, in the province of Shensi.
                               5.:\11\1EI.                            J26

      in separate seclusion, their door \vas closed and prohibited,
      and they had no liberty of lllovement. In such misery
      they passed the year. The V\'riting of \\!obito, ~aniha no
      I\:ishi, says :-" The Chief Envoy to Great Thang struck
      on an island and ,,,as overturned.} The Associate Enyoy
      had a personal audience of the Enlperor and sho,ved hinl
      some Yemishi. Upon this the Yenlishi presented to the
      Emperor a ,vhite deer-skin, three bo\,"s, and eighty
      arro\vs.'~

    15th day. By a decree to the 1Iinisters, the Empress had
the Urabon 2 Sutra expounded in all the Temples of the capitaL
and requital made to the ance~tors for seven generations.
    In this year, the Kuni no Miyakko of Idzu1110 ,vas con1-
manded to repair the shrine of the Itsuki:J God.
    A fox bit off the end of a creeper \vhich a labourer of the
district of ali held in his hand, and ,vent off with it. Moreover
a dog brought in his mouth a dead man's hand and forearnl
and laid it in the Ifuya shrine. [Signs that the Empress ,vas
about to die. 1
    Again, the Koryo Envoy's had a bear-skin,.. on \vhich they
put a price of sixty pounds of floss silk. The market com-
missioner laughed and went a\va)".
    A I(oryo painter, named !(omaro,a on the day on. ,vhich he
entertained guests of his o\vn surname in his private house,
borrowed sevent:y official Polar bear-skins for them to sit upon.
The guests were ashamed and astonished and ,vent a\\'ay.
    6th year, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. The I~ory() Envoys, A.D. 660.
the Eul-syang, Ha Chhyu-mun, and his suite, numbering over
one hundred persons, anchored in Tsukushi.
    3rd month. Abe no ami \vas sent on an expedition ,vith a XXVI. 16
 fleet of 200 ships against the land of Su-shen. Abe no Omi
 made some Yemishi of Michinoku embark on board his o\vn
 ship. They arrived close to a great river. 6 Upon this over a
  1   Sic in original.                       ~ Ullambana in Sanskrit.
  3 The character rendered Itsuki (\vith several variants) Ineans stern,
severe, and at first sight would seem a general epithet for the Gods of
Idzulno. But there ,vas a Tenlple of Itsuki in this province, so that the
word seems to have becolne a proper nanle. The same root occurs in
Itsuku-shilna, the sacred island in the Inland Sea, near Hiroshima.
  4 A shigunla skin.   See above, XXVI. 10.
  a Obviouc;lya Japanese name.                fi Perhaps the Ishikari river.
          J26                           NIIIONGI.

          thousand Yemishi of Watari-shima I assembled on the sea-
          shore and made a camp facing the river. Two men of this
          camp came forward and called out hurriedly, saying :-" The
          Su-shen fleet has arrived in great force and threatens to slay
          us. We pray, therefore, to be allowed to cross the river and
          to serve the Government. Abe no Omi sent a boat to go and
          fetch these two Yemishi, and inquired from them where the
          enemy were concealed and the number of their ships. The
          two Yemishi accordingly pointed out the place of their con-
          cealment, saying :-" There are over twenty ships." There-
          upon he sent messengers to summon them, but they refused to
          come. Abe no Omi accordingly heaped up on the beach
          coloured silk stuffs, weapons, iron, etc., to excite their cupidity.
          The Su-shen people thereupon drew up their fleet in order,
          and tying feathers to poles, raised them aloft by way of flags.
          They approached with equal oars and came to a pause in a
          shallow place. Then from one of the ships they sent forth two
          old men who went round the coloured silk stuffs and other
          articles which had been piled up, examining them closely.
          They then changed the single garments they had on, and each
          taking up one piece of cloth in his hand, ,vent on board their
          ship and departed. Presently the old men came back again,
          took off the exchanged garments, and laying them do,vn along
          with the cloth they had taken away, went on board their ship
          and departed. 2 Abe no Omi sent several ships to fetch them,
          but they refused to come, and returned to the island of Herobe.
          [Herobe is a separate part of Watari-shima.] After some time
          they asked for peace, but Abe no Omi refused altogether to
          listen to them. So they betook themselves to their own
           palisades and fought. At this time Mamukatsu, Nota no Omi,
           was slain by the enemy. While the battle was still going on,
           and was not yet fought out, the enemy, finding that they were
           being- beaten, put to death their own wives and children.
              Summer, 5th month, 8th day. The Koryo Envoy, the
           Eul-syang, Ha Chhyu-mun, and his suite arrived at the official
           residence of Naniha.
XXVI. 17.     In this month, the officials, by order of the Empress, prepared
            1   Yezo.
           2 This passage reads like a distorted account of the" unseen trade" which
         was carried on in these parts up till a comparatively recent period.
                                  SAl~IEI.                                205

one hundred raised seats 1 and one hundred Nokesa,2 and held
a Ninwo Hanya 3 meeting.
   Moreover, the Prince Imperial for the first time made a
clepsydra,4 by which he caused the people to know the hours.
   Again, Abe no Hikida no Omi presented to the Empress
more than fifty savages.~
   Again, a Mount Sumi was built near the pond of Iso no




                                  Clepsydra.
                                  C le p syd ra,



Rami, as high as a pagoda. On this occasion forty-seven men
of Su-shen were entertained.
  1  A sort of square dais from which the priests delivered their lectures.
  2  A kind of Buddhist priestly garment.
  :i Hanya is the Sanskrit Pradjfia, defined by Eitel as the" highest of the
six Paramita (cardinal virtues), intelligence, the principal means of attaining
to Nirvana." The meeting was to hear the reading of the Ninwo Hanya
Sutra. Ninw6 nleans " benevolent king."
  4 Vide Florenz for particulars as to clepsydra.

  a No doubt Ainos or Yeluishi are meant.
         266
         J26                          NIHONGI.

            Again, the people of the whole country carried arms \vithout
          reason when passing to and fro on the highways. The old
          people of the country said :-" This perhaps denotes the
          destruction of the Land of Pekche." 1
            Autumn, 7th month, 16th day. The Koryo Envoy, the
          Eul-syang, Ha Chhyu-mun, and his suite took their departure.
            Again, the man of Tukhara, Kendzuhashi Tatsua, desired to
          return to his native country, and asked for an escort officer,
          saying :-" I intend later to pay my respects to the Court of
XXVI. 18. the Great Country, and therefore, in token of this, I leave my
          wife behind. Accordingly, he took the way of the Western
          Sea with several tens of men.
                  In the" Record of the reigns of Japan," 2 written by the
               Koryo priest To-hyon, it is said :-" In the seventh month,
               etc., Chhyun-chhyu-chi,3 by the aid of the General-in-
               Chief, Su Ting-fang, caused Pekche to be invaded and
               destroyed." One account says :-" Pekche brought ruin
               upon itself, owing to the feminine want of principle of the
               Royal Consort, who arbitrarily usurped the helm of
               Government and slew the wise and good, thus inviting the
               calamity which came upon them. Ought one not to be
               watchful? Ought one not to be watchful?" In a note it
               is stated :_H Chhyun-chhYll-chi, of Silla, was unable to
               accomplish his wishes by the Minister Ke-kim. 4 There-
               fore he again served Thang, and, putting off the national
               garb, made a fawning appeal to the Son of Heaven, \vith
               the object of bringing disaster on a neighbouring kingdom
               and preparing the accomplishment of his ends."
XXVI. 19.         The writing of Hakatoko, Yuki no Muraji, says :_H In
               the year Kanoye Saru, the 8th month, Pekche was reduced
               to submission. After this, on the 12th day of the 9 th
               month, the visitors' were dismissed to their own country.
               On the 19th day they started from the Western capital.
               On the 16th day of the loth month, they arrived back at
               the Eastern capital, and then for the first time met


           I  Which took place in this year.                     2 B $.

           3  King of Silla. His historical name is The-chong.
           .. A Koryo statesman.
           5 i.e. the Japanese Envoys to Thang.    See above, XXVI. IS.
                              SAI~'1EI.                             J26

     Aritlla and his four companions. On the 1St day' of the
     11th month, the thirteen royal persons captured by'
     General Su Ting-fang and his men, from the King of
     Pekche do\vn to the Crown Prince Nyung and others,
     \vith the Prime l\Iinister Sa-chhek, Chhyon-pok-kuk,
     Pyon-syong, and others of lo\ver rank, thirty-seven persons,
     making in all fifty persons, were delivered up to the Govern-
     ment. They' \vere at once led before the Emperor, \vho
     spoke kindly to them and released them on the spot. On
     the 19th the Emperor bestowed presents,l and on the 24th
     \ve started from the Eastern capital."
  9th month, 5th da)T. Pekche sent a Talsol, the Buddhist
novice/ Kak-chY'ong, and others with the follo,ving message to
the Empress ~one book says, "They escaped hither and
gave information of their hard case "~ :-" In the 7th month of
this year, Silla, relying on its strength and assuming a bluster-
ing attitude, picked a quarrel \vith its neighbour, and dra\ving
the Thang people into it, overturned pekche. Sovereign and
Ministers ,,,ere all captured, and scarce a living 50ul 3 ,vas left."
        In one book it is said :-" On the loth day of the 7th
     month of the present year, Su Ting-fang, of Great Thang,
     dre\v up the fleet under his command in the harbour of XXVI. 20.
      Micha, while Chhyun-chhyu-chi, King of Silla, \\lith his
     horse and foot occupied ~Iount No-syu-ri, and so they
     attacked Peke he from both sides. The fighting \vent on
     for three days. Our Royal city \vas taken. On the 13th
     day of the same month, they began to demolish the Royal
     city. 1\,Jount NO-5yu-ri is on the eastern border of
      pekche."
   Upon this K\visil Pok-sin, Eunsol of the \Vestern Division,
was mightily enraged, and betook himself to 110unt Im-sya-ki
[one book says, "N orthern Mount Im-kom-li "], \vhile Yb
Chit-chin, Eunsol of the Central' Division, occupied the
walled city of Kumanori" [one book says, "1tlount To·to-ki-
nyu "]. They each formed a camp and assembled the scattered
troops. Their weapons had become exhausted in the previous

   1 On the Japanese Envoys.                           2 S'ramalJcra.

  • Lit. "a chewer of food."
  .. No doubt identical \vith Kumanare mentioned above, the present Ung-
chon. See above, \r 01. I. p. 367.
         268
         J26                           NIHONGI.

          campaign, and therefore they fought with flails! The Silla
          army was beaten, and Pekche made booty of their arms, so
          that the Pekche weapons were as efficient as ever, and Thang
XXVI. 2J. did not dare to come in. Pok-sin and the others at length got
          together their countrymen, and with them held the Royal city.
          The people of the land paid honour to them, saying :-" The
          Minister Pok-sin! The Minister Cha-chin!" It was only
          Pok-sin who, by the admirable military expedients which he
          invented, raised up the country, which was already ruined.
             Winter, loth month. Kwisil Pok-sin, Minister of Pekche,
          sent the Minister Kwi-chi and others with a present to the
          Empress of over one hundred Thang prisoners. These are
          now the men of Thang of the two districts of Fuha and Kata-
          agata in the province of Mino. They also asked for troops
          and requested assistance. At the same time they prayed that
          the Prince Yo Phung-chyang 2 might be given back [one
          book says :-" Minister Kwi-chi is the Talsol, Chyong-chin "],
          saying :-" The men of Thang, leading after them our maggot-
          pests, 3 came and wasted and harassed our territory. They
          overturned our Governnlent and took prisoners our Sovereign
          and his Ministers.
                   King Wicha, of Pekche, his wife Eun-ko, his son
                Nyung, etc., and his Ministers, viz. the Prime Minister,
                Chhyon Pok-kuk, Pyon-syong, Son-teung, and others,
               over fifty persons in all, were captured by General Su on
               the 13th day of the 7th month, autumn, and sent away to
               the Land of Thang. This was perhaps what was denoted
XXVI. 22.       by the causeless bearing of arms:'
             Now the people of the Land of Pekche, putting their trust
          afar off in the Emperor's protecting care, have assembled
          together anew, and formed a kingdom. We now humbly
          beg that we may be allowed to wait upon the Prince Phung-
          chyang, who was sent by Pekche to be in attendance at the
          Celestial Court, and to make him the Ruler of the Country,
          etc., etc."
            The Empress made an order, saying :-" We learn that in
           1Or clubs.                     2 See above, A.D. 63 1•

           3The "maggot pest" is a kind of grub destructive to grain.     But the
         word for pest also means" enemy." Silla is obviously intended.
          4 See above, XXVI. 17.
                                 SAl~IEI.                               26 9
ancient times there have been cases of troops being asked for
and assistance requested: to render help in emergencies, and
to restore that \vhich has been interrupted, is a manifestation
of ordinary principles of right. The Land of Pekche, in its
extremity', has come to us and placed itself in our hands.
Their o\vn countr)7 having been brought to ruin, having- no-
where to betake themselves for help and none to apply to,
making spears their pillo\vs, tasting gall,l and holding firmly
to the hope of aid, they have come from afar and made El
memorial to us. Our ~ resolution in this matter is unshakeable.
We shall give separate orders to Our generals to advance at
the same time by a hundred routes, and then, like gathering
clouds \vith thunderous comrnotion, meeting together at Sat6k,
to massacre the monsters, and afford relief to the sufferers. Let
the proper officials supply them with everything they require,
and let them be dismissed with all due ceremony, etc., etc."
         Prince Phung-chyang, with his \"ife and children, and
       his uncle, Chhyung-seung, etc., \vere dismissed home.
       The actual time of their being sent off may be seen in
       Year \,"11. One book says :-" The Empress established
       Phung-chyang as King, and made Se-syang his assistant.
       They \vere sent off \vith all due ceremony."
    12th month, 24th day. The Empress proceeded to the
Palace of Naniha. The Empress, in order to comply with the
request of Pok-sin, thought of going to Tsukushi and thence
despatching a force in aid, and she therefore went there 3 in the
 first place and made provision of weapons of all kinds.
    This year, with a vie\v to the invasion of Silla in the interest XXVI. 23.
 of Pekche, an order \vas given to the province of Suruga to
 build a ship. "Then it was fjnished, and had been hauled as
 far as Wornino, that ship, during the night, without cause,
 changed its bow for its stern. l~y this people knew that in the
 end there \vould be defeat."
  1 To taste gall at every Ineal or to be ahvays looking at gall-as the Prince

of Yueh did in order not to forget his grievance against the Wu State.
Giles. Gall in China does not r.epresent bitterness, as \vith us, but courage.
   ~ Or their.                                        3 To Naniha.

  4 '[he commentators sug-gest that "Vornino \vas a place in Shinano, but

Shinano is an exclusively inland province, and it is not probable that a
vessel destined for use in an invasion of Corea should have been dragged
overland.
   VOL. II.                                                        T
             J26                               NIHONGI.

                It was reported from the province of Shinano :-" A swarm
             of flies has flown in a westerly direction, crossing the Oho-
             saka hill. It was ten fathoms in thickness, and in height
             reached the azure sky." Some people gathered that this por-
             tended the defeat of the army of relief. There was a popular
             song which said : -

                                 The little rice-field
                                 Cultivated by my wife
                                 The wild geese devour-
                                 The wild geese of Mitowada-
                                 The \\'oman's rice-field
                                 The wild geese devour:
                                 My eldest son and I make a noise
                                 (But still) the woman's rice-field
                                 The \\'ild geese devour. l

 A.D. 661.      7th year, Spring, 1st month, 6th day. The Imperial ship
XXVI. 24.
             first put to sea for the expedition against the West.
                8th day. The Imperial ship arrived at the sea of Ohoku.~
             At this time the Imperial Princess Ohota-hime 3 gave birth to
             a daughter, to whom accordingly the name was given of the
             Imperial Princess Ohoku.
                14th day. The Imperial ship came to an anchor at the
             temporary Palace of Nigitatsu no Ishiyu in the province ofIyo.
                3rd month, 25th day. The Imperial ship returned to Una no
             Ohotsu, where the Empress occupied the temporary Palace of
             Ihase, the name of which the Empress altered to Nagatsu.


               1 The text of this poem is extremely corrupt and obscure, and the above

             interpretation is highly conjectural. I have followed pretty closely the
             " Shiki" version, the \vriter of which had before him a somewhat different
             text frOln that no,v given in editions of the" Nihongi." To arrive at the
             meaning he transposes a nun1ber of syllables, \vhich may appear a rather
             violent proceeding, his idea apparently being that the original author of the
             poelus had purposely transposed these syllables so as to render his composition
             unintelligible to those \vho had not the clue. The \vild geese are the Chinese
             and Silla men, who, in spite of the protests of Japan, continue to lay waste
             the Land of Pekche, whose weakness is alluded to by the words ,"'ife and
             WOlnan. Dr. Florenz gives a detailed critical examination of the various
             versions of this poem.
               2 In Bizen.

               3 Daughter of Tenchi Tenno, and consort of Temmu Tenn6.
                                 SAl~IEI.                              268

  Summer, 4th month. Pok-sin, of Pekche, sent an Envoy to
present a memorial requesting permission to wait upon (and
bring a\vay) their Prince Kyu-he.
        In the" Record of the reigns of Japan," written by the
     Priest To-hy()n,l it is said :-" Pok-sin, of Pekche, pre-
     sented a writing in \vhich he begged the Eastern Court to
     give up his Lord I~yu-he.t, One book says :-" In the
     fourth month the Empress transferred the capital to the
     Palace of Asakura."
   5th rnonth, 9th day. The Empress removed her residence
to the Palace of Asakura 2 no Tachibana no Hironiha.
   At this time trees belonging to the Shrine 3 of Asakura were
cut do\vn and cleared a\vay in order to build this Palace.
Therefore the Gods \vere angry and demolished the building.
Some were also struck,o1 and in consequence the Grand XXVI. 25-
Treasurer ;1 and many of those in \vaiting took ill and died.
   23rd day. Tamna,f) for the first time, sent Prince A-pha-ki
and others with tribute.
        In the \vriting of Hakatoko, Yuki no NIuraji, it is stated:
     - " On the 25th day of the 1st month of the year Kanoto
     Tori (A.D. 661), we arrived at Yueh-chow on our return
     journey. On the 1st day of the 4th month, leaving Yueh-
     chow, we proceeded homewards in an easterly direction,
     and on the 7th arrived south of lVIount Ch'eng-an-shan.
     On the 8th day at cock-crow we put out to sea with a
     south-west wind in our favour, but in mid-ocean we lost
     our way and tossed about, undergoing much suffering.
      On the 9th day at nightfall \ve reached the island of
     Tamna with great difficulty. There \ve induced Prince
      A-pha-ki and eight other natives of the island to
      embark with us in the Guest-ship 8 to the end that we

  1   See abO\Te, XXV I. 18.
  2   Thought to be in Chikuzen. Tachibana no Hironiha (the wide court of
the orange-blossoln) is probably an ornamental epithet.
  :. Shrine is llsed for a Shinto place of worship; tenlple Ineans a Buddhist
telnple.
  4 By a curse froin the deities.

  .~ Another reading is Chief Chamberlain.
   fi Quclpaert.                             ; See above, XXVI. 19.
   ~ The ship in which they had gone as visitors to China.
             J26                               NIHONGI.

                  might present them to the Imperial Court. On the 23 rd
                 day of the 5th month, we presented them to the Imperial
                  Court at Asakura. This was the first time that Tamna was
                 received at Court. Moreover, the Envoys, who had been
                 slandered by Tarushima, Yamato no Aya no Atahe, a
                 follower of Chihung, received no gracious command. 1
                 These Envoys were wroth, and their anger penetrated to
                 the Gods of High Heaven, who \vith a thunderbolt killed
                 Tarushima." The men of that day said of this :-" The
                 divine vengeance of Yamato is near."
               6th month. Prince Ise died.
               Autumn, 7th month, 24th day. The Empress died in the
             Palace of Asakura.
               8th month, 1st day. The Prince Imperial, in attendance on
            the Empress's remains, returned as far as the Palace of Ihase.
            That evening, on the top of Mount Asakura, there ,vas a
            demon ~ '\l'earing a great hat, who looked down on the funeral
            proceedings. All the people uttered exclamations of wonder.
               \Vinter, loth month, 7th day. The Empress's funeral train
            returning, put to sea. Hereupon the Prince Imperial, having
            come to an anchor in the same place, was filled with grief and
            longing for the Empress. So he sung to himself, saying :-.

                                    Longing as I do
XXVI. 26.                           For a sight of thee,
                                    No\v that I have arrived here,
                                    Even thus do I long
                                    Desirous of a sight of thee!

              23rd day. The funeral of the Empress, returning, anchored
            at Naniha.
              11th month, 7th day. The Empress's remains were teln-
            porarily interred at Asuka-gahara.
              Mourning began on this day, and lasted for nine days.

               1 I t is not clear \vhether the "gracious comJnand " ,vas that of the Elnperor

            of China or the Enlpress of Japan. I t appears to me that the writer is here
            going back to the slander of the Envoys, \vhile in China, by another follo\ver
            of Chihung (XXVI. 14), and that the gracious cornlnand, the \vant of \vhich
            enraged theIn, was a courteous message from the Chinese Enlperor to the
            Empress of Japan.
              2 Or spirit.
                      SAI~IEI.                        273
  The "Record of the reigns of Japan" says :-" The
men of Thang, Hsii Shon-yen and others, \vho \vere taken
prisoners by Pok-sin, arrived in Tsukushi." One book
says :-" In the }'ear Kanoto Tori (A.D. 661), the one hun-
dred and six Thang prisoners presented by Pok-sin,
~Iinister of Pekche, took up their abode at Harita in the
province of Afumi.       Under the year Kanoye Sarn
(A.D. 660), it is already' stated that Pok-sin presented
Thang prisoners. Therefore it is no\"" explained what was
done \vith them."
                                 BOOK XXVII.
                                                                        l
                THE EMPEROR AME MIKOTO HIRAKASU 'VAKE.


                              (TEllCH/2 TENNO.)

       THE Emperor Arne mikoto hirakasu wake was the eldest son of
       the Emperor Okinaga tarashi-hi hiro-nuka. J His mother was
       called the Empress Arne toyo-takara ikashi-hi tarashi-hime. 4
       In the fourth year of her reign, the Empress Arne toyo-takara
       ikashi-hi tarashi-hime resigned the Dignity to the Emperor
       Ame-yorodzu toyo-hi/ and established the Emperor 6 as Prince
       Imperial. The Emperor Ame-yorodzu toyo-hi died in the tenth
       month of his later fifth year. 7. In the following :year the Em-
       press Dowager assumed the Imperial Dignity. She died in the
       seventh year of her reign, on the 24th day of the 7th month.
       The Prince Imperial, clad in v/hite garments,s discharged the
       functions of government. 9
         In this month General Su, the Turkic Prince Ch'ipichiali 10
       and others proceeded by two routes-land and sea-as far as
XXVII. the Koryn walled city.ll
 2.      The Prince Imperial removed his residence to the Palace ot
          1 Anle, heaven; nlikoto, behest; hirakasu, thro\v open.      Wake is con-
       nected with wakaki, young. It is nearly equal to our \vord prince.
         2 Heavenly intelligence.       3 Jomei Tenno.           Ii Kogioku Tenno.

          5 Kotoku Tenno.                (, i.e. the present Enlperor Tenchi.
          ; i.e. of the period Hakuchi, the second of the t"vo year-periods into
       which his reign was divided.
          ~ Mourning. Giles says" half-mourning;;' but the phrase has here a more
       general application. Unbleached hempen cloth \vas probably the lnaterial.
          9 The phrase '" filJ is rendered in the interlinear gloss by matsurigoto

       kikoshimesu, i.e "attended to the Governnlent." Giles and Williams give
       another explanation, which does not suit the present passage. But are not
       the filj here the Inourning regulations? and does not the phrase mean
       " announced the mourning for the Empress"?
          10 Chinese pronunciatiol.l.                11 No\v Phy()ng-syang.
                              TENCHI.                               268
N agatsu, where by degrees he attended to the organization of
the foreign war.
   In the 8th month he sent the generals of the Front Division,
Adzumi no Hirafu no :Nluraji, of Lower Daikwa rank, and
Kahabe no Momoye no Omi, of Lower Sh6k,va rank, and the
generals of the Rear Division, Abe no Hikeda no Hirafu no Omi,
of Lower Daikwa rank, Kuma, l\fononobe no ~Iuraji, of Upper
Daisen rank, and Oho-ishi, ~Jori no Kimi, of Upper Daisen
rank, to the assistance of pekche. He also sent arms and grain.
         Another book adds here :-" He sent separately Ajimasa,
      Sawi no ltluraji, of Lower Daisen rank, and Takutsu,
      Hada no Miyakko, of Lo\ver Shosen rank, for the protec-
      tion of pekche."
   9th month. The Prince Imperial, while having his Court at
the Palace of N agatsu, conferred a cap of woven stuff 1 on
Phung-chhyang, the Pekche Prince. Moreover he gave him to
wife the younger sister of Komoshiki, Oho no Omi. He
accordingly sent Ajimasa, Sa\\ri no :rvI uraji, of Lower Daisen
rank, and Takutsu, Hada no lVliyakko, in command of a force of
more than five thousand men to escort him to his own country.
 Now \vhen Phung-chhyang
arrived in his country,
 Pok..sin came to meet
 him, and bowing his head
 to the ground, delivered to
 him the government of the
 land, entrusting to him
 everything without excep-
 tion.
    12th month.     Informa-                                     XXVII.
 tion was received from                                           3·
  Koryo that in this 12th
 month the cold in that                    Cloud-chariot.
 country was so intense
 that the River Phe-kang 2 \vas frozen. Therefore the Thang army
 made an uproar with drums and gongs, cloud-chariots 3 and
  1 See above, XXV. 41.
  2 Probably the river no\\" known as the 'The~tong-kang.
  3 17ide illustration. The cloud·chariots were movable erections for
overlooking the enemy's defensive ,yorks. They correspond to the turris of
Roman \varfare.
J26                              N II-IONGI.
battering-engines. The Koryo troops were brave and stalwart,
and therefore re-took two of the Thang forts. There were
only two left, which they prepared to take by a night attack.
The Thang soldiers, nursing their knees, wept aloud. But
their (the Koryo men's?) arms were blunted and their strength
exhausted, so that they were unable to take them! If this is
not a case of navel-biting 2 disgrace, what is ?
        The priest To-hyon says :-" To describe the intentions
     of Chhyun-chhyu 3-He was really about to begin with




                               Battering- engine.


     Koryo, and he first made it known to pekche. The close
     attack of Pekche was exceedingly urgent and distressing,
     therefore it is so stated." 4
  In this year Mara, Kishida no Omi, Governor of the province
of Harima, and others, presented a precious sword, saying :-
"It was found in a hole in the millet-field of a man of the
district of Saya."
  Moreover, when the generals for assisting Koryo cast anchor
at the beach of Kaphari in Pekche, they lit a fire. The ashes
became changed and formed a hole, from which there issued a

      l The two forts above mentioned.
      2 i.e. helpless disgrace. To bite one's navel is impossible.
      ~ King of Silla.                         4 All this is luost unclear.
                                  TENCHI.                         277
thin noise like that of a sounding arrow. l Some said that this
was an omen of the ultimate downfall of Koryo and pekche.
   1St year, Spring, 1St month, 27th day. A grant was made A.D. 662.
to the Kwisil Pok-sin, Minister of Pekche, of 100,000 arrows,
500 kin of raw silk, 1000 kin of floss silk, 1000 tan of cloth,
1000 hides of leather, and 3000 koku 2 of seed-rice.
   3rd month, 4th day. The Emperor presented to the King of XXVII.
Pekche 300 tan of cloth.                                          4·
   In this month the men ofThang and the men of Silla invaded
Koryo. Koryo asked aid from our Government, and generals
were sent, who occupied the walled city of Sonyu. Owing to
this, the men of Thang were unable to conquer the southern
territory, while Silla \vas prevented from overthrowing the
fortresses to the west.
   Summer, 4th month. A rat brought forth young in a horse's
tail. The Buddhist priest Tohyon divined, saying :-" The
men of the North are about to attach themselves to the
Southern Country." Perhaps (he meant) that Karyn, being
beaten, would become a vassal of Japan.
   5th month. The General-in-Chief, Adzumi no Hirafu no
Muraji, of Lo\ver Daikin rank, and others, in command of a
fleet of 170 ships, escorted Phung-chhyang and his people to
the Land of Pekche, where, by an Imperial edict, he was made
to take up the succession to the (royal) Dignit)7. Moreover
a golden tablet \vas conferred on Pok-sin, his back was
stroked, and he \vas praised and an honorary grant made to
him. At this time Phung-chhyang and his people, and also
Pok-sin, received the Imperial decree \vith their heads bowed to
the ground, so that everybody shed tears.
   6th month, 28th day. Pekche sent the TaIsol, Manchi, and
others to offer tribute and bring presents.
   Winter, 12th month, 1st day. Phung-chhyang of Pekche,
his Minister Pok-sin, and others held counsel with Sawi no
Muraji and Yechi no Takutsu, saying :-" This Chyu-yu 3 is
far away from cultivated lands. The soil is unfertile, and there XXVII.
is no land suitable for agriculture or for the mulberry tree. It 5·
is simply a stronghold for defensive warfare. If we \\'ere to
     1    Nari-kabura.   See above, Vol 1.   p: 87.
     ~ :\ Ineasure no\v equal to 5· 13 bushels.
     :i   No doubt the same place as the Sonyu above mentioned.
         J26                           NIHONGI.

          rernain here long, the people ,,,ould starve. \Ve sllould remove
          to Phi-syong. Phi-syong is girt on the north and west by the
          Rivers Ko-nyan and Tan-kyong, \vhile on the south and east it
          is protected by deep mud and high earth\,"orks. It is encom-
          passed on all sides by' rice-fields, to which the rain-water is
          drawn down by cutting canals. Its produce of flowers and fruit
          is the fairest of all the three Kingdoms of Corea. A source of
          food and clothing, it is a choice situation favoured by the two
          first principles. l It maybe said that it lies 1o,\", but \vhy should
          this prevent us from removing thither? " Upon this Yechi no
          Takutsu alone stood for\vard and objected, saying :-" The
          distance between Phi-syong and the position occupied by the
          enemy can be covered in one night's march. This is extremely
          near. Should a surprise take place, regrets \vould be useless.
          Now starvation is a secondary matter; destruction demands
          our first attention. The reason why the enem~y do not no\v
          rashly approach is that Chyu-yu has taken advantage of a
          scarped hill by \vhich it is thoroughly well fortified. The cliffs
          are high and the ravines narro\v. This makes it eas.y to defend
          and difficult to attack. But if ,ve occupied the low ground,
          how should the country have remained undisturbed up to this
          day?" In the end, they refused to listen to his remonstrances
          and made Phi-syong the capital.
             This year, in order to assist Pekche, arms \vere put in order,
 XXVII. ships fitted out, and stores of army provisions prepared.
   6.
             This year \vas the year Midzuno~ye Inu (59th) of the Cycle.
A.D. 663.    2nd year, Spring, 2nd month, 2nd day. Pekche sent the
          Talsol, Kim-s)"u, and others to offer tribute. Silla men wasted
          by fire four districts of the southern border of pekcbe. They
          also captured Antak and other strong positions. This being
          so, the enemy were not far from Phi-syang,2 and this positidn
          became therefore untenable, so the)7 came back again and
          occupied Ch~yu-yu, in accordance ,vith Takutsu's policy.
             In this month, the Minister Pok-sin sent up (to the Emperor)
          Hsii Shou-yen and other Thang prisoners.
             3rd month. Wakugo, Kamitsukenu no Kimi, and Ohobuta,
           I The Yin and Yang.
           2 I cannot identify Phi-syong or Antok, but they 01USt have been in the
         southern part of the present province of Kyongsyangdo. The Coreans were
         fond of changing the nanles of their cities.
                               TENCI-II.                            279
Hashibito no Muraji, Generals of the Front Division, \Vasa,
!(ose no Kamusaki no Omi, and Nemaro, Mi\va no IZimi,
generals of the ~Iiddle Division, and Hirafu, Abe no Hikeda
no Omi, and Kamatsuka, l Ohoyake no Onli, Generals of the
Rear Division, ,\'ere sent in command of 27,000 men to invade
Silla.
   Summer, 5th month, 1St day. Inugami no Kimi, \vho had
hurried to I\.or)'o to give information of \varlike matters, on
his \vay back sa,v IZyu-he 2 at the \valled city of Syok-sy,ong.
Kyu-he accordingl)' told him of Pok-sin's guilt.
   6th month. "Takugo, Kamitsukenu no I{imi, General of
the Front Division, and the others, took t\VO cities of Silla
named Sapi and I~inokang. Phung-chhyang, I{ing of Pekche,
suspecting Pok-sin of harbouring treasonous intentions, bound
him with a leathern strap passed through his palms. But he
was unable to come to a decision of himself, and did not kno"v~
what to do. So he inquired of his Ministers, saying :-" Pok-
sin's guilt has been so and so. Shall he be beheaded, or not? "
Upon this, the Talsol, Tok Chip-tok, said :-" This traitor ought X X V I I .
                                                                   7        ·
not to be let off." Pok-sin forth\vith spat upon Chip-tok and
said :-" Thou \\'orthless dog! Thou idiotic slave!" The I{ing
compelled his stont fello,vs to execute him and to put his head
in pickle.
   Autumn, 8th month, 13tl1 day. Silla, taking advantage of
the King of Pekche having put to death his o\vn good general,
laid plans to enter that country direct, and first of all to
capture Chy'u-y'u. No\v Pekche learnt the enetny's plan, and
addressed his generals, saying :-" I no\v hear that Omi,
Ihohara no Kimi, the auxiliar)' general of the Land of Great ;~
Japan, in command of more than 10,000 stout fello,vs, is on
the point of arriving hither by sea. I hope that you, my
generals, \vill take such measures as are suitable in advance.
I intend ffi)Tself to proceed to Pekchon and give hiln seasonable
entertainment."
   17th day'. The hostile generals arrived before Chyu-yu
 and encompassed the Roy"al city. The Thang generals, in
command of 170 fighting ships, dre\v up in line of battle in the
  I Sickle-handle.          ~ A Pt\kche Prince. See above, XXVI. ~4·
  3 Dai Nippon. The first instance of the use of dai, great, in this con-
nection.
         J26
        280                            NIHONGI.

          Pekchon river. 1 The Japanese warships which first arrived
          engaged the Thang fleet, but had not the advantage, and
          therefore retired. Great Thang stood on its guard in strict
          order of battle.
             27th da)1. The Japanese generals and the Pekche King,
          regardless of the aspect of affairs, said to one another :-" If
          we struggle which shall get first, they will naturally retire of
          themselves." So they again led forward the routed Japanese
          ranks, and the troops of the Middle Division of their force, to
          attack the Great Thang fleet. But Thang closed upon their
          vessels from right and left, and engaged them from all sides.
          In a short space of time the Imperial force was defeated, and
          many fell into the water and were drowned. The ships were
XXVII. unable to manreuvre either astern or ahead. Yechi no Takuts u
   8.
          looked up to heaven and made oaths; he gnashed his teeth,
          and in his rage slew several tens of men. He then fell fighting.
          At this time King Phung-chhyang of Pekche ,vith a number
          of others, embarked in a ship and fled to Koryn.
             9th month, 7th day. Not until now did the Pekche city of
          Chyu-yu surrender to Thang. Then the people of that
          country said to one another :-" Chyu-yu has fallen; there is
          nothing more to be done; this day the name of Pekche has
          become extinct. Shall \ve ever visit again the place \vhere
          the tombs (of our ancestors) are? Let us, ho,vever, repair to
          the city of Ho-njye, and meet there \vith the Japanese generals,
          so as to concert with them the measures required b~y the
          circumstances." In the end the wives and children, who had
          from the first remained in the walled to\vn of Chhim-pok.. ki,
          were informed of their intention to quit the country'.
             11th day. They set out for Muho.
             13th day. The~y arrived at Ho-nye. 2
             24th day. The Japanese fleet, \vith the (Pekche) 1finister
           Yo Chit-sin, and the Talsol, Mok-so K\vi-cha, I\:ong-na Chin-
           syu, and Ong-nye Pong-nyu, along with the people of the
           COuIltry, arrived at the city of Ho-nye. The next day they
 XXVII. set sail, and at length bent their course towards Japan.
   9·        3rd year, Spring, 2nd month, 9th day. The Emperor,3 by
A.D. 664·

          1 I take this to be the river no\v called Naktong, in the south of Corea.
          ~ The Interlinear Kana has Tere.
          3 He is called Prince Ilnperial both above and below.
                               TENCIII.                             268
orders to the Prince Imperial, his younger brother, announced
an auglnentation and revision of the caps denoting official rank,
and also an increase in the designations of the grades, as \vell
as matters relating to the senior members of families, their
vassals and domestic retainers.
   There were twenty-six grades of caps, viz. :--
            Dai-shiki              (greater woven stuff)
            Sho-shiki              (lesser       do.)
            Dai-shu               (greater embroidery)
            Sh6-shu               (lesser       do.)
            Dai-shi                (greater purple)
            Sh6-shi               (lesser      do.)
            Upper Dai-kin          (greater brocade)
            Middle Dai-kin         (       do.      )
            Lower Dai-kin         (        do.      )
            Upper Sh6-kin         (lesser brocade)
            Middle Sh()-kin       (        do.)
            Lower Shu-kin         (        do.)
            Upper Dai-sen          (greater mountain)
            Middle Dai-sen        (        do.          )
            Lower Dai-sen          (       do.          )
            Upper Dai-otsu        (greater kingfisher 1)
            Middle Dai-otsu       (        do.          )
            Lower Dai-otsu        (        do.           )
            Upper Sho-otsu        (lesser kingfisher)
            Middle Sh6-otsu       (        do.        )
            Lower Sho-otsu        (        do.        )
            Dai-ken               (greater ken)
            Shu-ken              (lesser ken) ~
   These made in all twenty-six grades. The former kwa (flower)
was changed to kin (brocade), and six grades were added,
beginning with Kin and ending with Otsu. There was also
an augmentation and alteration by which the single grade of
initial rank was changed to the two grades of Daiken and
Shoken. These were made different, but in all other respects
the forrner rule was follo\ved.
  To the senior members of the great families long s\vords
  1 See above, XX\'. 41.
  ~ Ken 111CanS to set up, to establish. These t\VO grades correspond to
the Risshin or Kembu named above, XXV. 41.
       J26                            NIHONGI.

       \vere granted, and to the seOnior members of lesser families
       short swords were granted, while to the senior members of the
       Torno no Miyakko, etc., shields and bows and arrows were
       given. Moreover, their vassals and domestic retainers were
       settled.
XXVII.    3rd month. Prince Syon-kwang1 of Pekche and his people
 10.
       were given a residence at Naniha.
          There was a star which fell north of the capital.
          This spring there was an earthquake.
          Summer, 5th month, 17th day. Liu Jen-yUan, the (Chinese)
       general for Pekche, sent the Chao-san-ta-fu 2 Kuo Wu-ts'ung to
       present a letter-box 3 and gifts.
          In this month the Oho-omi, Soga no Muraji, of Tai-shi
       rank, died.
                 One boo.k says :-" The Oho-omi died in the inter-
               calary fifth Il10nth."
          6th month. The Empress Dowager 4 Shin1a died.
          Winter, roth month, 4th day. Kuo \Vu-ts'ung and his
       companion s were dismissed home. On this day the Emperor
       ordered Nakatomi no Naijin S to send the Buddhist priest
       Chi-sho \vith presents for Kuo Wu-ts'ung.
          4th da~y.6 An entertainment was given to Kuo \Vu-ts'ung
       and his suite.
          In this month Ke-kim, Prirne Minister of Koryo, died in
       that countr)l. He left dying injunctions to his children,
       saying :-" Ye brethren, live together in harmony·, as a fish
       and \vater, and do not conlpete with one another for rank.
       If )"OU do not so, )"OU will surely become a laughing-stock to
       your neighbours."
          12th month, 12th day. Kuo Wu-ts'ung and his suite took
       their departure.
          1 The history of Pekch6 in the" Tongkam " ends with the previous King

       \Vicha. Syon-kwang \vas his son.
         2 Lower fifth rank under the Thang dynasty.

          ;i Of course, a box containing a letter is Ineant.

         .. The original mig-ht be Inore literally translated Enlpress grandmother,
       and this Empress ,,'as really Tenchi's grandmother, but as this term is used
       elsewhere simply as an honorary appellation, I prefer to render it by
       Empress Dowager.
         5 Viz. Katnatari K6.

         G This is the same date as the last.    There is something \vrong here.
                                   TEKCHI.                                   268
   In this month it ,vas reported from the provInce of Ahaji,
saying :-" In the \vater of a pig-trough belonging to 1fu,
Shinuta no Fumibito, a man of the district of Sakata, rice
gre\v all of a sudden. Mu gathered it and put it b)1. Every
day his wealth increased. There is a man called Oho, Ihaki no
Sukuri, of the district of Kurimoto, at the head of \vhose XXVII.
                                                                     II
bride's mattress rice gre\v up during her first night's sta)T \\7ith
him and formed an ear. In the morning it bent do,vn and
ripened. The follo\ving night another ear \vas formed. She
went out into the courty'ard, \vhen two keys fell do\vn from
heaven before her. S11e took them up and gaye t11em to Oho,
who from this time began to be a \vealthy nlan."
   In this year guards and beacon..fires ,,,ere placed in the
islands of Tsushima and Iki and in the Land of Tsukushi .
Moreover in Tsukushi a great embankment was constructed,
and ,vater collected. This \vas called a minoki or ,vater-
ca~tle.l
   4 th ~year, Spring, 2nd month, 25th day. The Empress A.D. 665.
Dowager Hashibito 2 died.
   In this month, after a comparison of the Pekche degrees of
official rank, there ,vas granted to the K\vi-sil, Chips5, in con-
sideration of the eminent services of the !\finister Pok-sin,
the rank of Lo,ver Shokin. [His original rank \vas that of
Talsol. 3 ] 11oreover Pekche common people, men and \\'onlen
to the number of more than 400, were giYen residences in the
district of Kanzaki, in the province of Afumi.
   3rd month, 1st day. For the sake of the Empress Do\vager
Hashibito, 330 persons entered religion.
   In this month rice-lands \"ere granted to the Pekche people
of Kanzaki.
   Autumn, 8th month. The Talsol, Tap Pon-chhyun, \vas XXVII.
sent to build a castle in the province of Nagata.                  12.

   The TaIsol, Ong-nyo Pong-nyu, and the Talsol, Sa-pi Pok-pu,
   1 A native authority quoted in the" Shiikai" edition says :-" The einbank-

Inent of the \vater-castle in the district of Mikasa is four ken (t\venty~four
feet) in height, fifteen ken in \vidth of base, and 400 ken froin east to \,"est.
The space \vithin the en1banklnent has been made into rice-fields.;'
  ~ K6toku Tenno's wife. Elnpress Do\vager is literally (~reat Consort.
  3 The Chinese characters used for this        in the " Nihongi" are   it  $.
But, as Dr. Florcllz points out, the proper characters are j"     tt\ "'hich in
Corean are read Tesol.
        J26                             NIHONGI.

           were sent to the Land of Tsukushi, where they built the t\VO
           castles of 0 hono and \Voyogi.
             Tamna sent ambassadors to the Court.
             9th month, 23rd day. The Land of Thang sent Liu Te-kao
           Chao-san-ta-fu,I Sub-prefect ~ of Ichon, and Shang-chu-kuo:i
           and others.
                   By others is meant a General of the Right Division of
                the Guards, of the rank of Shang-chu-kuo, a General for
                Pekche, \vho ,vas a Chao-ta-fu of Chu-kuo rank, b)T name
                Kuo ,,,r u _Ts'ung, and others, 254 persons in all. 7th
                month, 28th day. They arrived at Tsushima. 9th month,
                20th day. They arrived at Tsukushi. 22nd da)1. They
                for\\?arded a letter-case.
             Winter, loth month, 11th day. A great revie\v was held at
           Uji.
             11th month, 13th day. A banquet ,vas given to Liu Te-kao
           and the others.
             12th lnonth, I..J.th day. Presents were made to Liu Te-kao
           and the rest.
             In this month Lin Te-kao and his people took their
           departure.
             In this ~year Oho-ishi, ~Iori no Kimi, of Shukin rank, and
           others \vere sent to Great Thang, etc., etc.
                   By others is meant Ihashiki, Sakahibe no Muraji, of
                Shosen rank, and Harima, I(in1i no I(ishi, of Daiotsu rank.
                They no doubt \vent to escort the Thang Envoys.
A.l}. 666.   5th year, Spring, 1St Dlonth, 11th da)r. !{oryo sent Neung-
           nu, of the Forn1er Division/ and others to offer tribute.
             On this day Tamna sent Prince Si-yo and others to offer
           presents.
             3rd ll1onth. The Prince Imperial "vent in person to the
           house of Saheki no !{omaro no ~Iuraji to inquire of his illness.
 XX"IJ. He lamented him on account of his lo~yal service fronl the
    13·
           beginning.

          1  See above, XXVII. 10.                       ::l Sze.n1a.

          :i Upper-pillar Country. A title.
          ·1 There ,vere in Koryn five Di,·isions.          The first \vas the Inner or
        Yello\v Diyision; the second ,vas the Northern or After Division; the
        third ,vas the Eastern or Left Division; the Fourth \\·as the Southern or
        Former I)i\·ision; the fifth \vas the \\tgestern or Right Division.
                                  TENCIII.                                  268
   Summer, 6th month, 4th day'. Neung-nu of Kory(), of the
Former Division, and his people took their departure.
   Autumn, 7th month. There were great floods.
   This autumn the land-tax and commuted taxes ,vere remitted.
   Winter, loth month, 26th day'. !(ory'o sent the l\finister
Eul-syang 1 Om-chhu and others to offer tribute.
           The Chief Envoy, the Minister Eulsyang Om-chhu, the
      . - \ssociate Envoy Tun, of the rank of Talsyang, Ya-k\vang
      Hy()n-mu, of the Second Rank, and others.
   This winter the rats of the capital migrated to\vards Afumi.
   Over 2000 Pekche people, men and ,vomen, ,vere settled in
the East country. Without distinction of black and \\rhite/
they were all maintained at Government expense for three
years beginning with the year Midzunoto I.:S
   Chiyu, a Buddhist priest of the Yamato no Aya, presented
to the Emperor a south-pointing chariot. 4
   6th Year, Spring, 2nd month, 27th day. The Empress A.n. 667.
Arne toyo-takara ikashi-hi tarashi-hime S and the Imperial
Princess Hashibito 6 were buried together in the misasagi on
the Hill of \Vochi. On this day the Imperial granddaughter
the Imperial Princess Ohota was buried in a tomb 7 in front of
the misasagi.
   Kory(), Pekche and Silla all made mourning along the
 Imperial high\vay.8
   The Prince Imperial addressed the Ministers, saying :--" In
obedience to the commands of the Empress Do,vager and the
 Empress, I have compassion on the myriad people, and
therefore have not undertaken the work of constructing a stone
 sarcophagus. 9 I trust that this may be taken as a mirror and
 a lesson for all time."
    3rti month, 19th day. The capital ,vas removed to Afumi.
  1 An official rank.          2 i.e. of priests and laymen.           J A.O. 6(>3.

  4 A compass. See above, xx\rI. 10.
  h Saimei T'enno.                              Ii l~otoku 'renno's Consort.

  7 Several of th~ misasagi have just outside the Inoat cirtular Inounds of
much smaller siz~ These have a sinallinoat and one or t\VO ro\\'s of clav'
cylinders round then1. The ton1b in question is still pointed out and kno\v~
as the Ishidzuka or stone mound.
  ~ By \vhich the Imperial funeral procession passed.
  9 This is the literal translation, and it is true that stone sarcophagi \"'crc

used in burial. But I am disposed to think that the vault is intended. Not
  VOL. II.                                                             u
          286
           J26                            NII-IONGI.

XX'!I!.     At this time the common people of the Empire did not desire
  14·
            the removal of the capital. Many made satirical remonstrance,
            and there were also many popular songs. Every day and
            every night there were numerous conflagrations.
               6th month. The district of I{adono 1 presented to the
            Emperor a white swallow. 2
               Autumn, 7th month, 11th day. Tamna sent the Minister
            Chon-rna and others to offer presents.
               8th month. The Prince Imperial proceeded to the Yamato
            capital.
               Winter, loth month. Namseng/ of l(oryu, the elder brother,
            left the city" for a tour in the provinces. Upon this, his two
            younger brothers, who remained in the city, listening to the
            evil speeches of the gentry and nobles associated with them,
            opposed him and would not allow him to enter. Hereupon
            Namseng Ian away to Great Thang and laid plans for the
            destruction of his country.
               11th month, 9th day. Liu Jen-yiian, the (Chinese) General
            for Pekche, sent the Prefect of U ngsan/ in the Governorship
            of Ungchin,6 Szen1a Fats'ung, of Shang-chu-kuo rank, and
            others to escort Ihashiki, Sakahibe no l\Iuraji, of Lower Daisen
            rank, and his companions to the Governor-General's residence
            in Tsukushi. 7
               13th day. Szema Fats'ung and his companions took their
            departure homewards. Hakatoko, Yuki no Muraji, of Lower
            Sh6sen rank, and Moroshi, Kasa no Omi, of Lower Daiotsu
            rank, were made Escort Envoys.
               In this month there were built the castle of Takayasu in the
            province of Yamato, the castle of Yashima in the district of
X X V I I . Yamada in the province of Sanuki, and the castle 8 of Kanada
  IS·
            in the province of Tsushima.
          to nlake a sarcophagus would afford a very trifling relief to the people.
          The vault on the other hand \vas a very considerable work, o\ving to the
          enormous stones of which it was built.
             1 In Yalnashiro.         ~ A good Olllen.         :~ He was Chief Minister.
            4 Phyongyang, the capital, is Ineant.              :-) Bear-hill. Bear-port.
             6 The" Tongkam ,; says :-" In the year 660, Thang divided the {oriner

          territory of Pekch6 into five provinces, viz., Dng-chin, Mahan, Tongmyong,
          Keulunyon and Tokan.
            7 The Dazaifu or \iiceroyalty.
            8 We hear in this reign for the first tilne of the building of castles
                                TENCHI.                                 268
   Intercalary 11th Inonth, 11th day.
  Chonma and his companions received presents of 14 hiki of
brocade, 19 hiki of yuhada,l 24 hiki of dark red stuff, 24 tan
of violet cloth, 58 tan of peach-dyed stuff, 26 axes, 64 sickles,
and 61 s,vords.
   7th year, Spring, 1St month, 3rd day. The Prince Imperial A.D. 668.
assumed the Imperial Dignity.
        One book says that he assumed the Dignity in the 3rd
     1110nth of the 6th year-the year Hinoto U of the Cycle. 2
   7th day. A banquet ,vas given to the l\Iinisters \vithin the
Palace.
   23rd day. The Escort Envoys Hakatoko and his colleagues
reported their Inission.
   2nd month, 23rd day. Princess Yamato bime, daughter of
the Imperial Prince Furubito no Ohoye, ,vas appointed
Empress-consort. In the end fOUf concubines \vere provided.
One \vas the daughter of the Oho-omi, Soga no Yamada no
Ishikaha Mara, by name Wochi no Iratsume. [Some books
call her l\finodzuko hime.] She bore one son and t\\'o
daughters. The first \vas called the Inlperial Princess Ohota; XXVII.
the second ,vas called the Imperial Princess U no. 3 \Vhen she 16.
possessed the Empire she dwelt in the Palace of Kiyomibara
in Asuka. She after\vards removed the Palace to Fujihara.
The third ,vas called the Imperial Prince Takeru. He \vas
dumb and could not speak.
        One book says :_4' Wochi no Iratsume had one son
      and t\VO daughters. The first was called the Imperial
      Prince Takeru; the second was called the Imperial Princess
      Ohota; the third "ras called the Imperial Princess Uno."
      One book says :-" The daughter of the Oho-ami, Soga no
      Yamada no Maro, was named Chinu no Iratsume. She
      bore the Imperial Princess Ohota and the Imperial
      Princess Sarara."
    Next there \vas the younger sister of \Vochi no Iratsume,
named Mehi no Iratsume. She gave birth to the Inlperial
l)rincess ~linabe and the Imperial Princess Abe." vVhen the
(~j). This character, ,vhich in China and Corea nleans a \valled city,
is in Japan used in a sense nearly the sanle as our word" castle.;'
   I Silk stuff tied and then dyed, so that a pattern is produced.

   ~ A.D. 667.                :l lito Tenn(-l.             4 (~en11nei Tenno.
       288
       J26                            NIHONGI.

       Imperial Princess Abe possessed the Empire, she dwelt in
       the Palace of Fujihara. She after\vards removed the capital
       to Nara.
               One book say's :-" The name Sakurawi no Iratsume
            was given to Mehi no Iratsume."
          Next there \vas the daughter of the Oho-omi, Abe no
       Kurahashi Maro, named Tachibana no Iratsume. She gave
       birth to the Imperial Princess Asuka, and the Imperial Princess
       Nittabe.
         Next there was the daughter of the aha-ami, Soga no Akaye,
       named Hitachi no Iratsume. She gave birth to the Imperial
       Princess Yamabe.
         There were also four Palace women who bore (to the
       Emperor) sons and daughters. One was the daughter of
       Wotatsu, Woshiumi no Miyakko, named Shikobuko no Irat-
XXVII. sume. She had one son and two daughters. The first was
 17·   called the Imperial Princess Ohoye; the second \vas called the
       Imperial Prince Kahajima; the third was called the Imperial
       Princess Idzumi.
          Further there ,vas the daughter of Tokoma, Kurikuma no
       Obito, named Kurohime no Iratsume. She gave birth to the
       Imperial Princess Momutori.
          Further there ,vas Michi no Kimi Iratsume, who was the
       mother of the Imperial Prince Shiki.
          Further there was Yakako, Iga no Uneme, who was the
       mother of the Imperial Prince Iga. He subsequently received
       the cognomen of the Imperial Prince Ollotomo.
          Summer, 4th month, 6th day. Pekche 1 sent Mi-to-sa-pu
       and others to offer tribute.
          16th day. Mi-to-sa-pu and his companions took their de-
       parture.
          5th month, 5th day. The Emperor hunted 2 on the Moor of
       Kamafu. At this time the Prince Imperial, being the Emperor's
       younger brother, all the Princes, the Inner Minister 3 and the
       other Ministers were all without exception in his train.

         1 There was no I(ingdonl of Pckche at this tinle.
         2 Any excursion of the Emperor's was called hunting. The hunt on this
       occasion was no doubt for medicinal herbs (kusurigari), for which this was
       the appointed day.
         :1   Naijin.
                                TENCHI.                                 28 9
   6th month. The Prince of Ise and the Prince his younger
brother died on consecutive days. Their official rank is not XXVII.
                                                               18.
clear. 1
   Autumn, 7th month. Koryo sent Envoys by \vay of Koshi
to offer tribute. The winds and waves were high, and they
were therefore unable to return.
   Prince Kurikuma was appointed Governor of Tsukushi.
   At this time the province of Afumi practised military
exercises.
   Again, pasture farms were largely provided, and horses
were let loose there.
   Again, the province of Koshi presented to the Emperor
burning earth and burning water. z
   Again, by the shore-pavilion,3 fish of various kinds came,
covering the water.
   Again, the Yemishi were entertained.
   Again, the Toneri, by Imperial command, held banquets in
vario·us places.
   The people of that time said :-" Is the Emperor's life
drawing to a close? "
   9th month, 12th day. Silla sent Kim Tong-won, of the
rank of Sason, and others to offer tribute.
   26th day. Nakatomi no Naijin sent the Buddhist priests
Hoben and Shimpitsu to present a ship to the Te-kak-u·
Yu-sin, Prime Minister of Silla. It was delivered to Tong-w()n
and his companions.
   29th day. Mimimaro, Fuse no Omi, was sent with a present
for the King of Silla of a ship for the conveyance of tribute.
It was delivered to Tong-won and his companions.
   Winter, loth month. The Duke & of Ying, the Thang XXVII.
Commander-in-Chief, destroyed Koryo. v\lhen King Chyung- 19·
mu of Koryo first established that kingdom, he wished his
government to last for a thousand years. His mother said :-
" If thou governest the country well, thou mayst accomplish

  1  This sentence is no doubt an interpolation, as the "Shiikai" points out.
  2  No doubt coal (or peat) and crude petroleum are meant. The latter is
worked at the present day in Echigo, which forms part of the ancient
province of Koshi.
  3 The shore of Lake Biwa.                        4 An official rank.

  l) His name was Li Tsi.    See Mayers, p. 124.
         J26                           NIHONGI.

          this. However, it will last for just 700 years." 1 The downfall
          of this kingdom at this time took place just at the end of its
          existence for 700 )'ears.
             11th month, 1st day. There were presented to the King of
          Silla 50 pieces of fine silk, 500 kin of floss silk, and 100 hides
          of leather. These were delivered to Tong-won and his com-
          panIons.
             Presents were given to Tong-won and his companions, the
          value of which varied in each case.
             5th day. Maro, Chimori no Omi, of Lower Shosen rank,
 XXVII. and Kishi no Woshibi \vere sent to Silla. On this day, Kim
   20.
          Tong-won and his people took their departure.
             In this year the Buddhist priest Dogi6 stole the Kusa-
          nagi 2 sword and escaped with it, making for Silla. But wind
          and rain so perplexed him on his way, that he came back
          again. 3
A.D. 669.    8th year, Spring, 1st month, 9th day. Soga no Akaye no
          Omi was appointed Governor of Tsukushi.
             3rd month, 11th day. Tamna sent Prince Kumaki and
          others with tribute."
             18th day. A present of seed-grain was made to the King of
          Tamna. On this day Prince Kumaki and his people took
          their departure.
             Summer, 5th month, 5th day. The Emperor went hunting
          on the plain of Yamashina. 5 The Prince Imperial, who was
          the Emperor's ~younger brother, Fujihara no Naidaijin, and all
          the Ministers without exception followed in his train.
             Autumn, 8th month, 3rd day. The Emperor ascended the
           peak of Takayasu. He took counsel as to a project of repairing fi
          the castle there, but in pity for the labour which it would entail
          on the people, he abandoned this idea, and did not go on with
          1 The" Tongkaln " gives Ko Chyung-nlu as the name of the founder of

        the Kingdom of Kokuryo. The prediction is not given in this work.
          ~ See above, Vol. I. p. 205.
          3 This story has been considerably developed by later writers.

          4 Tamna, known to us as Quelpaert, and to modern Coreans as Che-ju,

        was for a long time luore or less independent of the rest of Corea. In the
        13th century the inhabitants were in continual rebellion.
          i. Now a station on the raihvay between Kioto and Otsu.        See above,
        XXVII. 17.
          li See above, XXVII. 14, and belo\v, XXVII. 22.
                                 TENCHI.                                268
the work. The people of that time appreciated this, and
exclaimed, saying :-" This is the virtue of loving.. kindness.
Is it not generous? " etc., etc.
   This autumn it thundered 1 in the house of Fujihara no
Naidaijin.
   9th month, 11th day. Silla sent the Sason, Tok-yu, and
others with tribute.
   Winter, loth month, loth day. The Emperor paid a visit
to the house of the Naidaijin Fujihara, and made personal
inquiry after his illness. His grief was exceedingly great.
Accordingly he said :-" It is surely no vain saying that the XXVII.
                                                                 21.
way of Heaven helps goodness: nor is the principle that the
accumulation of good actions redounds to happiness of no effect.
If there is anything which can be done, you ,viII inform me of
it." He ans\vered and said :-" Thy servant has been ,vanting
in cleverness: what more is to be said? Only I trust that for
my burial simple arrangements may be made. \Vhile alive I
did no service for my country at ,var; why, then, should I im-
pose a heavy burden on it \vhen I am dead?" etc., etc. The
wise men of that day, hearing of this, were filled with admira-
tion, and said :-" \Ve would humbly compare this one saying
with the wise maxims of ancient sages: shall the General of
the Great Tree's 2 refusal of rewards be related in the same
year with it ? "
   15th day. The Emperor sent his younger brother, the
 Prince Imperial, of the Eastern Palace,3 to the house of the
 Naidaijin Fujihara, to confer on him the cap of " Great Woven
 Stuff" and the rank of Oho-omi. 4 He also granted him a sur-
 name, and made him the House of Fujihara. 5 From this time
 forward he was generally known as Fujihara no Daijin.
  1   No doubt the meaning is that it waS struck by lightning.
  2   Feng I. Died A.D. 34. A famous comnlander under Han Kwang
\Vu, and renowned for modesty and dislike of ostentation. From his habit
of retiring to sit beneath a tree for the purpose of solitary self-communing,
he ,vas called by his soldiers the General of the Great Tree. Mayers, p. 4 I .
   :i The Heir to the Throne occupied the Eastern Palace, and is often

spoken of by this term.
   4 Or Daijin.

   a Fujihara is a town in Yamato, in the district of Takechi. The name
is a very famous one in subsequent Japanese History. This statesman is
better known as Kamatari K6. See above.
        J26                            NIHONGI.

            16th day. Fujihara no Naidaijin died.
                 The" Nihon Seiki" says :-" The Naidaijin died at the
               age of fifty in his private residence. He \vas removed for
               temporary burial to the south of the mountain. Oh! cruel
XXV'll.        Heaven! that could not bring itself to leave this aged man!
   22.
               Alas! what sorrow!'" The inscription on his tomb says
               that he died at the age of fifty-six.!
            19th day. The Emperor went to the house of Fujihara no
          Naidaijin, where he gave orders to Soga no Akaye no Omi,
          of Upper Daikin rank, and declared to him his gracious will.
          He accordingly besto\ved on him a golden incense-burner.
             12th month. There ,vas a fire in the Treasury. This winter
          the Castle of Taka~Y'asu was repaired. The Land-tax of the
          home provinces \vas collected. At this time the Temple of
          Ikaruga was burnt.
             This year Kujira/ Kahachi no Atahe, of Middle Sh6kin
          rank, and others ,vere sent on a mission to the Land of Great
          Thang.
             nloreover, the Minister Yo Chit-sin, the Minister Kwisil
          Chip-sa., and others, men and women, to the number of over
          700 persons, were removed and settled in the district of
          I{amafu in the province of Afumi.
             ~Ioreover, Great Thang sent !{uo Ya-ts'ung and others, more
          than 2000 men.
A.D. 670.    9th year, Spring, 1st month, 7th day. The Emperor, by
 XXVII.
   23·
          command     to the gentry and Daibu, held a great archery
          meeting within the Palace Gate.
             14th day. The Emperor promulgated Court ceremonial
          regulations, and rules for people to give way to each other
           when passing along the roads. 3 He also prohibited heedless
          slanders and foul falsehoods.
             2nd month. Registers of population were prepared. Robbers
           and vagabonds were suppressed.

           1 This is the first mention of such inscriptions. They were engraved on
        erect slabs of stone, or on wooden posts set up on the Inound. None
        belonging to this early period have relnained to our day.
           2 This personal name means "whale."

          3 In the Giseirei it is said: -" In passing along the highwayst the mean
        should get out of the \vay of the noble, the young of the old, and the light
        of the heavy."
                                TENCHI.                                 293
  At this time the Emperor visited the plain of Himo in the
district of I{amafu, and inspected a site for a Palace.
  Moreover, the Castle of Takayasu was repaired, and stores
of grain and salt collected.
   Moreover, one castle was built in Nagata, and two in
Tsukushi.
   3rd month, 9th day. Close to Miwi; on the mountain,
Shint() places of \vorship \vere laid out, and offerings of cloth
distributed to them. The litany was pronounced by N aka-
tomi no Kane no Muraji. 2
   Summer, 4th month, 30th day. After midnight a fire broke
out in H6riuji.:i Not a single building was left.
   There was great rain, \vith thunder.
   5th month. There was a popular ditty, as fol1()\vs : -
                      To sport by the end
                      Of the bridge thrown across"                                XXVII.
                      Come forth, IUy boy!                                         14·
                      To the eight-Cold ,vooden doors
                      Of the house of Tatnate
                      I f thou COinest forth
                      Thou shalt not repent it.
                      Come forth, nlY boy!
                      To the eight-fold wooden doors
                      Of the house of Tamate. 5

 6th month. \Vithin the capital a tortoise ,vas caught.
On its back was written the character for Saru. 6 It was
   1 \\there the well-known '[elnple of Mhvidera now stands-not far from

Otsu. Mi wi means august \vell. It \vas with water froln this well that the
Emperors Tenchi and TenlnlU and the Empress Jito \vere \vashed at birth.
Hence the name.
   2 It \vas the province of the N akatomi to read the norito, or Shinto

prayers, while the Inlbe laid out the offerings.
   3 The same as the lkaruga Tenlple mentioned above, XXVII. 22.          Vide
 , Murray's Handbook," 2nd ed. p. 394.
   .. i.e. a slight, telnporary bridge.
   r, By the house of Tamate one commentator understands the Temple of

H6riuji. Another thinks the poem may, perhaps, be an advice to the
Emperor Temn1u to enter religion, and avoid the IUlperial Dignity. To
me its application is ,vholly obscure. The nletre is irregular naga-uta.
    6 The monkey, one of the years of the Duodenary Cycle.    I t recurred t\VO
years later, and \\"as marked by civil disturbances, of which this was
supposed to be an Olnen.
        294
        J26                             NIHONGI.

           yellow above and black beneath,1 and was about six inches in
           length.
             Autumn, 9th month, 1st day. Tsuratari, Adzumi no
           Muraji, was sent to Silla.
             In this year water-mills were made; and therewith iron
           smelted. 2
A.D. 671.    loth year, Spring, 1st month, 2nd day. Saga no Akaye no
           Omi, of Upper Daikin rank, and Rose no Hito no Omi, of
          Lower Daikin rank, advanced in front of the Palace and
          offered their congratulations on the New Year.
             5th day. Nakatomi no Kane no Muraji, of Upper Daikin
          rank, made an announcement of Rami matters. 3
             On this day the Imperial Prince Ohotonlo was appointed
          Dajudaijin,4 Soga no Akaye no Omi was made Prime Minister
          of the Left :& Nakatomi no Kane no Muraji was made Prime
          Minister of the Right. 6 Saga no Hatayasu no Omi, Kose no
XXVII. Hito no Omi, and Ki no Ushi no Omi were made Daibu of
   25·
          the Censorate.1

            1 The colours of Heaven and Earth, according to the Chinese.       In this
       tortoise they were inverted, the yellow (Earth) being above, and the black
       (Heaven) beneath. This ,vas regarded as a sign of a change of reign.
           2 The briefness of this notice is very tantalizing to anyone interested

       in the history of Japanese metallurgy. The ,vord for mill does not mean
       nlerelya water wheel, but something for pounding or grinding. Perhaps
       the trituration of the ore is intended. The character for smelt is f€j, which
       might also be rendered fuse. Florenz has" gesmiedet," i.e. "forged," and
        one Japanese dictionary has kitafu, which has the same meaning. But no
       such meaning is given in Giles, and as the Interlinear Kana has \vakas,u, "to
        nlelt," I have little doubt that smelting is intended. Evidently the writer
       was familiar with the process of smelting. It is the use of a mill in con-
       nection with it that is deemed worthy of record.
           a It is not quite clear what this means-probably some kind of Shinto
       religious celebration.
           4 i.e. Prlnle Minister.   The Wamiosho gives for this the Japanese phrase,
       Oho-matsuri-goto no OhO-olatsu.kimi, the g-reat lord who attends to
       matters of the great government, but it is difficult to believe that so clumsy
       an expression was ever in general use. Dajodaijin is sufficiently cumber-
       some.
          ;) Sadaijin.
          6 U daijin.    I t will be observed that the Left takes precedence of the
       Right.
          i Censors, \vhose duty it is to keep the Emperor inforlned on all matters
       of public importance. Giles.
                                   TENCHI.                        295
        The Gioshi \vere perhaps what are now called
      Dainagon.
   6th day. The Emperor's younger brother, the Prince
 Imperial, promulgated on his behalf the regulations for
giving effect to the institution of cap-rank. [One book says:
- " The Imperial Prince Ohotomo announced."~ There \vas
a general amnesty to the Empire.
        The ceremonial and the names of the cap-ranks are
     fully described in the Shin-ritsu-ryo.l
   9th day. Koryo sent Ka-ru, Te-syang of the Upper Division,
and others with tribute.
   13th day. Liu Jen-yuan, the (Chinese) general for Pekche,
sent Li Shou-chen and others to present a memorial.
   In this month the rank of Upper Daikin ,vas conferred on
the (Pekche) Minister Yo Chit-sin and on Sathek Syo-myong
[second official of the Department of Ceremonies], the rank
of Lower Shokin on Kwisil Chip-sa [Chief of the Department
of Education], the rank of Lower Daisen on the Talsol
Kong-na Chin-syu [he had a military trainingJ, Mok-so Kwi-
cha [he had a military training], Ong-nye Pong-nyu 2 [had a
military training], Tap-pon Chhyun-chho 3 [had a military
training], Pon-il Pi .. cha, Chhan Pha-ra, Kim-na, Kim-syu,
[acquainted with medicine] and Kwisil Chipsin [acquainted
with medicine]. The rank of Upper Sh6sen was conferred on
the Talsol, Tok Chyong-syang, Kil Te-syang [acquainted
with medicine], H6 Chol-mo [thoroughly understood the five XXVII.
classics] and Tak Pong-mu [skilled in the Yin and Yang]. 4 26.
The rank of Lower Sh6sen ,vas conferred on the other
Talsal, more than fifty persons in all.
   There ,vas a popular ditty, as follows : -

                        The oranges-
                        Each on their o\vn branches,
                        Though they grow-


  ) Ne\\' laws.
  ~ These  three are nlentioned above, XXVII. 8, as Pekche refugees to
Japan.
  3 Apparently. the same person who is called Tap Pon-chhyun above,
XXVII. 12 •
  .. i.e. in philosophy, divination, etc.
       296
       J26                              NIIIONGI.

                              When strung as pearls,
                              Are strung on the same string. 1

         2nd month, 22nd day. Pekche sent Te-ku Yong-syon and
       others with tribute. 2
         3 rd month, 3rd day'. Honjitsu, Kibumi no Miyakko,3 pre-
       sented to the Emperor a water-level.
         17 th day. The province of Hitachi presented as tribute
            Nakatomibe no Wakako. He \vas one foot six inches in
            height, and was born in the year Hinoye Tatsu (656), so that
            he was in this year sixteen 4 years of age.
               Summer, 4th month, 25th day. A clepsydra was placed in
            the new pavilion, and for the first time the hours were struck,
            and bells and drums sounded. For the first time the clepsydra
X X V I I . was used.   This clepsydra was the one first constructed by the
  27 -
            Emperor himself when he was Prince Imperial, etc., etc.'
               In this month Tsukushi reported that a deer had been born
            with eight legs, but that it had died immediately.
               sth month, 5th day. The Emperor occupied the Little
            Western Palace. The Prince Imperial and all the Ministers.
            attended on him at a banquet. On this occasion, rustic
            dances were twice performed before him.
               6th month, 4th day. An announcement was made in regard
            to the military measures requested by the messengers from the
            three departments of Pekche. 6
               15th day. Pekche sent Ye Chin-chit and others to bring
            tribute.
               In this month Prince Kurikuma was made Governor of
       Tsukushi.
         Silla sent Envoys bearing tribute.

           1 The allusion is to the Coreans, who, although foreigners, received the

        same honours as Japanese. The Tachibana, or orange, was a foreign
        fruit.
           2 The "Shlikai" editor says that this was a remnant of the Pekche

        Ministers.
           3 Of Corean extraction.
           4 According to the Japanese reckoning, \vhich includes both the year of

        birth and the year to which the reckoning is made. We should say fifteen.
           6 See above, XXVI. 17.

           6 I t appears from a passage in the" T ongkaln " that in the year 673 SOUle

        of the Pekche cities still held out agal nst the Chinese.
                                 TENCHI.                        297
   In addition they presented to the Emperor a ,vater buffalo
and a copper pheasant.
   Autumn, 7th month, 11th day. Li Shou-chen of Thang and
his companions and the Pekche Envoys took their departure
together.
   8th month, 3rd day. Karu, Te.. s)rang of the Upper Division
of Koryo, and his people took their departure.
   r8th day. An entertainment ,vas given to the Yemishi.
The Emperor took to his bed and was ill. [One book says:
- " In the 8th month the Emperor took ill."]
   Winter, loth month, 7th day. Silla sent the Sason, Kim
Manmol and others to bring tribute.
   8th day. The ceremony of opening the eyes 1 of roo
Buddhas took place in the interior of the Palace.
   In this month, the Emperor sent messengers to offer to the
Buddha of Hok6ji a kesa, a golden begging-bo,vl, a tusk of XXVII.
                                                                     28.
ivory, aloes wood, sandal wood and various objects of value.
   17th day. The Emperor's disease became more grave. He
sent for the Prince Imperial to come into the chamber where
he was lying and addressed him, saying :-" Our condition is
desperate: what remains after belongs to thee," etc., etc.
Hereupon the Prince Imperial with repeated obeisances declined
firmly to receive (the succession), giving ill-health as his reason.
He said :-" I pray thee let the mighty task be entrusted to
the Empress, and let Prince Ohotomo undertake the promul-
gation of measures of Government. It is thy servant's request,
for the Emperor's sake, to renounce the \vorld and practise
religion." The Emperor gave his consent, and the Heir to
the Throne got up and bowed repeatedly. He straightway
proceeded to the south of the Buddhist Hall in the interior of
the Palace, and sitting upon a chair, shaved off his hair and
became a priest. Upon this the Emperor sent him a present
of a kesa by Sugita no Ikuiha.
   19 th day. The Prince Imperial visited the Emperor and
asked leave to go to Yoshino and practise the religion of
Buddha. The Emperor granted him permission to do so.
The Prince Imperial accordingly went to Yoshino. The Oho-
ami and others escorted him as far as Uji, and then returned.
   11th month, loth day. The Governor 2 of the province of
    I   CorrespondiQg" to consecration.          2   Kokushi.
       J26                               NIHONGI.

       Tsushima sent a messenger to the Viceroy 1 of Tsukushi, say-
       ing :-" On the day after the moon's birth these four persons,
        viz., the Buddhist priest D6ku,2 Satsuyama, Tsukushi no Kimi,
        Sasa, Karashima no Suguri, and Iha, Nunoshi no Obito,
        arrived from Thang and reported that the Thang Envoys,
        Kuo Ya.. ts'ung and his suife, numbering 600 persons, escorting
XXVII. Sa.. thek Son-teung and his companions, who numbered 1400
 29·
       persons, the total number being 2000, had embarked in forty-
       seven ships which came to an anchor together at the island of
        Hijishima,3 where they said to one another :-' The ships of
       our people are numerous, and if they suddenly arrived thither, 4
       it is to be feared that their guards would he alarmed, and
       engage us in a battle of archery.' So they have sent on Dahun
       and others to give some notice in advance of their intention of
       proceeding to the court."
          23rd day. The Imperial Prince Ohotomo took his place in
       front of the embroidery figure of Buddha in the Western Hall
       of the inner precinct, with Saga no Akaye no Omi, the Prime
       Minister of the Left, Nakatomi no Kane no Muraji, the Prime
       Minister of the Right, Soga no Hatayasu no Omi, Kose no Rito
       no Omi and Ki no Ushi no Omi in attendance on him. He
       then took in his hands an incense-burner, and standing up first,
       made a vow, saying :-" We six men, with like minds, will
       obey the Emperor's commands. If any of us disregard them,
       surely he will incur punishment from Heavetl," etc., etc. Upon
       this, Soga no Akaye no Omi, the Prime Minister of the Left,
       and the others took the incense-'burner in their hands, and
       standing up in order, one after another, made a vow with tears
       of blood, saying :-'"' We, your five servants, will follow Your
       Highness's example and obey the Emperor's commands. If
       any of us should disregard them, let the Four Heavenly Kings
       smite him, and let the Gods of Heaven and Earth moreover
XXVII. punish his offence.    Let the thirty-three Devas & bear witness
 30 •
       to this. 1'lay his line become extinct and his house come to
       certain ruin," etc., etc. 6
         1  Dazaifu.       2 Called Dobun below.     One of these readings is an error.
         :J  N at to be identified.
         -& i.e. in Japan.                   & Traiyastrims'as.   Vide Eitel, p. 178.
         6 'There is here a       curious mixture of Brahn1anism, Buddhism, and
       Chinese religion. Curiously no reference is l11ade to the Shinto Gods,
       although there is a notice of their official worship not Inany years before.
                                   TENCHI.                                299
   24th day. Fire broke out in the Palace of Afumi. It began
from the third storehouse of the Treasury.
   29th day. The five Ministers, in respectful attendance on
the Imperial Prince Ohotomo, made oath in presence of the
Emperor.
   On this day, a present was made to the King of Silla of 50
hiki of fine silk, 50 hiki of coarse silk, 1000 kin 1 of floss silk,
and 100 hides of leather.
  12th month, 3rd day. The Emperor died in the Palace of
Afumi.
  11th day. He was temporarily interred at the New Palace. 2
  At this time there was a popular song, as follows:-

                                        I.
                       For the trouts of Yoshino
                       In Miyoshino-
                       F or the trouts indeed
                       I t is well by the side of the island:
                       Alas! woe's Ine !
                       Here beneath the nagi plants,
                       Here beneath the water~par~dey.
                       Alas! woe's Ine !

                                       II.
                      As not even one                                            XXVII.
                      Has yet been loosed                                          31.
                      Of the eight-fold cords to be loosed
                      By the Olni children,
                      The Prince's cord is loosed.

                                      I I I.
                      As the red horse
                      Plods on reluctantly
                      Over the plain of Makudzu,
                      Why any message?
                      Better simply to act. 3


  1  Or catties. About I~ lb. avoirdupois at the present day.
  ~  The subsequent and forinal burial is not mentioned. It \vas in a
misasagi at Yamashina, a village in the district of Uji, in Yalnashiro.
   3 These stanzas, or rather separate poeIns, are aU supposed to refer to
 Prince Ohotomo, \vho, as we shall find in the next book, ,vas obliged to fly
from the capital, and ultimately strangled hilnself in despair. Makudzu in the
3°0                            NIHONGI.

   17th day. The Sason, Kim Manmal, and his companions,
the tribute-envoys sent by Silla, took their departure.
   This year, in the house of a man of the district of Yamada,
in the province of Sanuki, there was a chicken with four legs.
   Moreover, in the Imperial kitchen, there were eight pots
which gave out a sound. Sometimes one pot sounded, some-
times two, and sometimes three together. Sometimes all eight
sounded together.

last is, perhaps, not the name of a place, but silnply "true dolichos "-the
plain where the true dolichos plant grows. The nagi in No. I. is a kind of
edible ,vater-plant. The application of these poems to the political events
of the day is obscure, and I see no advantage in discussing the interpreta-
tions offered by the Japanese commentators.
                         BOOK XXVIII.
                                                                1
THE EMPEROR AMA NO NUNAHARA OKI NO MABITO. -PART I.


                        (TEMMU TENNO.)

THE    Emperor Ama no Nunahara oki no mabito was the
younger brother by the same mother of the Emperor Arne
nlikoto hirakasu \vake. In his childhood he was called the
Imperial Prince Oho-ama. 2 From his birth he had a majestic
and intelligent appearance: when he grew to manhood, he was
virile and martial. He was skilled in astronomy and the art of
becoming invisible. He took to him the Imperial Princess
U no, daughter of the Emperor Arne mikoto hirakasu wake, J
and made her his wife. In the first year of the Emperor Arne
mikoto hirakasu wake, he was made Heir Apparent. 4 In the
fourth year of his reign, winter, the tenth month, and the seven-
teenth day, the Emperor took to his sick-bed. His sufferings
were very severe. U pan this he sent Yasumaro Saga no Omi
to fetch the Heir Apparent, and to introduce him to the Great
Hall. Now Yasumaro had been always a favourite of the Heir
Apparent, and secretly taking thought for him, said :-" Think

  1 Heaven-of-marsh-tniddle-plain (N unahara is the nalue of a place), offing-

of-true-man (i.e. noble). Temmu means" Heavenly valour."
  This book contains the history of the civil \var which resulted in establish-
ing Temmu Tenno on the throne. It is therefore wrongly entitled the
"History ofTemmu." It should rather be called the" History of K6bun,"
the posthumous nanle by which some historians designate his predecessor,
Prince Ohotolno.
  The Preface to the" Kojiki " gives a highly imaginative account of the
events related in this book. See Ch. K., pp. 7, 8, 9.
  ~ This is not the saIne ama (heaven) as the previous one, but is written
with the characters for " fisherman."
  3 l'enchi Tenno.                            4 Literally 4' Eastern Palace."

  VOL. II.                                                          X
        302                             NIHONGI.

           before you speak." Upon this the Heir Apparent suspected a
           secret plot and was cautious. \Vhen the Emperor gave him his
          commands and bestowed on him the vast undertaking,· he de-
           clined, saying :-" Thy servant has unfortunately al\vays had
          bad health: ho,v could he maintain the State? I beseech Your
           Majest)?, besto,v the entire Elnpire on the Empress-consort,
          and let the Imperial Prince Ohotomo be established as successor
          to the throne. I \vill to-day renounce the world, and it is my
          desire for Your Majest:y's sake to perform acts of merit." The
           Emperor gave his consent, and on the same day he renounced
          the \vorld and put on the priestl)T garb. He accordingly col-
          lected his private weapons and deposited them everyone in the
          Department.
              19th day. He \vent to the Palace of Yoshino. At this time,
          Soga no Akaye no Omi, Prime Minister of the Left, Nakatomi
          no Kane no l\/luraji, Prime Minister of the Right, and Saga no
XXVIII. Hatayasu no Omi, the Dainagon, etc., escorted him. They re-
  2.
          turned from Uji. Some one said :-" Give a tiger wings and let
          him go." 2 This evening he occupied the Palace of Shima.
              20th day. He arrived at Yoshino and took up his abode
          there. 3
              At this time he assembled his toneri, and addressed them,
          saying :-" I am now entering religion, and will carry out its
          practices. Let those therefore who wish to follow my example
          and practise religion remain here. If any of you wish by
          serving the Government to gain a name, let them return and
          do so." But there were none who would go away.
              He again assembled the toneri and addressed them as before.
          Upon this one half of the toneri stayed with him, and one half
          withdre'v.
              12th month. The Emperor Arne mikoto hirakasu wake
          died.
Α.Γ. 672.    1st year, Spring, 3rd month, 18th day. Inashiki, Adzumi no
          Muraji, of Inner Lesser seventh rank, was sent to Tsukushi to
          announce the mourning for the Emperor to Kuo Ya-ts'ung and
          the others. Upon this Kuo Ya..ts'ung and his people all put on
          1  The succession to the throne.
          2  A Chinese saying. " You will have to bear the consequences," is under-
        stood.
           3 The previous day's entry can only refer to his starting on the journey.
                                 TEJ\I:\IV.                              303

nlourning and raised lament for him three times, turning
towards the East and bowing their heads to the ground.
   21st day. Ruo Ya-ts'ung 1 and the others with repeated
obeisances offered a box with a letter and presents in token of
goodwill.
   Summer, 5th month, 12th day. Armour and bows and
arrows were presented to Kuo Ya-ts'ung and his companions.
Other presents \vere made to them on this day, amounting
altogether to 1673 hiki of coarse silk, 2852 tan of cloth, and
666 kin of floss silk.
   28th da}i. Koryo sent Pu I(a-pyon, of the Former Division,
and others with tribute.
   30th day. Kuo Ya-ts'ung and his people took their depar- X X V I I I .
                                                                3                ·
ture.
   In this month, Wogimi, Yenowi no Muraji, addressed the
Emperor, saying :-" Thy servant went alone to Mino on
private business. At this time the Government 2 instructed the
Governors of the two provinces of Afumi and \Vohari, saying:
, Let labourers be designated in advance for the construction
of a misasagi.' 3 Accordingly each man was provided \vith a
weapon. Thy servant is of opinion that this is not on account
of a misasagi, but that there surely will be trouble. If thou
dost not speedily get out of the way there may be danger."
   Another man said to the Emperor :-" Pickets have been
stationed at various places along the wa:r from the Afumi
capital to the Yamato capital. Moreover orders have been
given to the guards of the Uji bridge to intercept the convey-
ance of private supplies of provisions by the officers of the
Household of the Heir Apparent, the Emperor's younger
brother."   ojThe Emperor was displeased at this, and accord-
ingly gave orders to make investigation. Having ascertained
that it was a fact, he made order, as follows:-
  1 These proceedings took place at the Court of the Etnperor Kobun,

but this fact is intentionally slurred over by the historian, \vho chooses to
ignore this Elnperor's short reign as far as possible. Other authorities state
that this letter from the Eluperor of China \\'as addressed-It'The Enlperor
(Kotei) of Great Thang respectfully inquires respecting the health of the
King of Wa ((~ X)." In another document of this time, flO\VeVer, the tern1
a   * X,      i.e. King of Japan, is used.
  2 Kobun Tenno's Government.                    3 For the :Enlperor Tenchi.

  .. Styled Elnperor a fe\v lines above.
        3°4                             NIHONGI.

            "The reason why We renounced the Dignity and retired
         from the world was simply in order to heal OUf disease, and
         make whole Our body so that We might live for a .hundred
         years. But now, if, owing to circumstances over which We
         have no control, We are to be exposed to calamity, why should
         We quietly allow the destruction of Our person? "
            6th month, 22nd day. The Emperor gave orders to Woyori,
         Murakuni no 1'Iuraji, Kimide, Wanibe no Omi, and Hiro,
         Muketsu no Kimi, saying :-" We are now informed that the
         Ministers of the Court of Afumi are plotting mischief against
         Us. Do ye three therefore hasten to the province of Mino and
         give information to Honji, Oho no Omi, the Governor of the
XXVII I. hot baths of the district of Yasuhama. Explain to him the
 4·      necessities of the position of affairs. Let him first of all levy
         the soldiers of his o\vn district, and then by means of the
         Governors of provinces set on foot the troops of all kinds and
         quickly beset the Fuha road. \Ve are now starting."
            24th day. He was about to proceed to the East when one
         of his 1vlinisters made representation to him, saying :-" Can
         the Afumi Ministers have no intention of conspiring? If they
         have, they will certainly notify it to the Empire, and the roads
         will in consequence become impassable. Why should we
         proceed to the East unarmed, without a single soldier? (If we
         do,) thy servant fears that our enterprise will fail of success."
         The Emperor followed this advice. He wished to summon
         back to him \Voyori and the others, and therefore despatched
         Yesaka, Ohokida no Kimi, Ohotomo, Kibumi no Muraji, and
         Shima, Afu no Omi, to Prince Takasaka, who had charge in
         his absence, l directing them to apply to him for posting
         bells. 2 Accordingly he said to Yesaka and the others :-" If
         you cannot get the bells, let Shima come back and report to
         me. Let Yesaka hasten to Afumi, and summon the Imperial
         Princes Takechi and Ohotsu 3 to meet me in Ise." Yesaka and
         his companions then went to the official charged with the care
         of the Palace in the Emperor's absence, and putting forward
         the orders of the Heir Apparent,4 asked Prince Takasaka for

          1 Of the Palace of Okamoto in Asuka, says the "Shukai " editor.
          2 The bells conveyed a right to post-horses. See above, p. 206.
          a Sons of TenlffiU Tenno.
          4 Temmu Tenno is meant.     The original is literally" Eastern Palace."
                                TEl\Il\IU.                     3°5
posting-bells, \vhich \vere refused. Then Yesaka \vent to Afumi,
and Shima returned and reported to the Emperor, saying:-
"\Ve did not get the bells."
   On this day, they started on their journey to the East
Country. So great \vas the urgency that the Emperor did not
wait to ride, but \vent on foot. Suddenly he fell in \vith a XXVIII.
saddle-horse belonging to Ohotomo, Agata no Inukahi no 5·
Muraji. The Emperor accordingly mounted him. The
Empress-consort followed in a palanquin. It was not until
they had gone as far as the River Tsufuri that the Emperor's
carriage 1 came up, so he got into it. The original follo\vers of
the Emperor at this time \vere the Imperial Princes Kusakabe
and Osakabe, with the toneri \Vogimi, Yeno\vi no 1.furaji,
Ohotomo Agata no Inukahi no 11uraji, Ohome, Saheki no
Muraji, Tomokuni, Ohotomo no ~Iuraji, Ihose, Waka-zakura-be
no Omi, Nemaro, Fumi no Obito, Chitoko, Fumi no Atahe,
Wobayashi, Yamashiro no Atahe, Y~amashirobe no \Voda,
Chitoko, Ato no Muraji, Afumi, Mitsugi no Obito, and the
like, more than twent~y persons in all. There were n10re than
ten \vornen. ~he same day they' arrived at Aki in Uda/ ,vhere XXVIII.
                                                                  6.
they \vere overtaken by Jlakuda, Ohotomo no Muraji, and
Ohotomo, Kibumi no Muraji, from the Palace of Yoshino. At
this time Mate, Hashi no ~Iuraji, a toneri of the Department of
the official rice-fields, supplied food to those who followed the
Imperial carriage. Passing the village of Kammura, there were
there more than twenty hunters, with Ohokuni, Yenomoto no
Muraji, at their head. These were all summoned to follow the
Imperial carriage. Moreover, Prince 11ino was called. He
forthwith came and joined the Emperor's suite. At the Town
Hall of the district of U da they \vere met by fifty pack-horses
of the province of Ise which \vere carrying the rice of the hot-
baths. All the rice was thro\vn away, and thus mounts were
provided for those who \vere going afoot. When they reached
Ohono, the sun went do\vn, the mountains \vere dark, and
they were unable to proceed. Accordingly they pulled down
the fences of the houses of that village, by which they provided
lights and so reached the district of Nabari at midnight. They
set fire to the posting-station of Nabari, and made proclamation
to the people of that village, saying :-" The Emperor is on his
     1   A palanquin is probably meant.        ~   In Yamato
        306                             N IIIONGI.
        way to the East Country. Therefore let all the people flock to
        join him." Ho\vever, not a single man \vould come. 'Vhen
        they were just arriving at the River Yokogaha, a dark cloud
        overspread the sky to the breadth of more than ten rods. Now
        the Emperor wondering at this, forthwith kindled a light, and
        holding in his own hand the Rule,l divined, saying :-" This is
XXVIII. an omen of the division of the Empire into t\VO parts. How-
 7·
        ever, in the end We shall probably acquire the Empire. So
        they hastened on,vards and arrived at the district of Iga, where
        they set fire to the posting-station. Going round to N aka-
        yama in Iga, they \vere joined by the district governors of that
        province in command of a body of several hundred men. At
        dawn they reached the plain of Tara, where a short halt was
        made and food partaken of. On arriving at Yamaguchi ~ in
        TSUmU)Te they were joined by the Imperial Prince Takechi, \vho
        came across by \vay of I{afuka. He was followed by Ohohi,
        Tami no Atahe, Tokotari, Akazome no Miyakko, Hiro-sumi,
        Ohokura no Atahe, Kunimaro, Sakanohe 110 Atahe, J1'uruichi
        no Kuromaro, Takeda no Ohotoko, and Abe, Ikago no Omi.
        They crossed Mount Miyama and arrived at Suzuka in Ise.
        Here Ihatoko, Miyake no ~Iuraji, Governor of the province,
        with the Vice-Governor, Kobuto, Miwa no I(imi, Tarumaro,
XXVIII. Tanaka no Omi, magistrate of the hot-baths':i Nihinomi, Takata
 8.
        no Obito, and ,others joined the Emperor at the district of
         Suzuka. So in the morning a body of 500 troops \vere
        despatched to block the road over the mountain of Suzuka.
         When they arrived at the foot of the Hill of I(ahawa the sun
         went down, and as the Empress-consort was fatigtled, her
         palanquin was stayed for a while until she rested. But the
         night closed in gloomily, and it threatened rain, so that a pro..
         longed halt was impos~ible, and they proceeded on their way.
         Hereupon it became cold, and there was a violent thunder-
         storm, with rain, so that the clothing of those in the Emperor's
         train was drenched and they could not bear the cold. When
         they arrived at the Town Hall of the district of Mihe, they set

           1 An instrun1ent llsed in divination.   It is described as round above to
         represent Heaven and square belo\v to represent the Earth.
           2 Or, " the foot of the hill of Tsulnuye."

           3 A village for the supply of things needful for the Elnperor's hot baths is

          probably meant. The hot baths above, pp. 304 and 305, are no doubt silnilar.
                               TENCHI.                                 3°7
fire to onc of the buildings and so warmed the shivering- luen.
That night, at midnight, the \Varden of the Barrier of Suzuka
 sent a n1cssenger to the En1peror to inform him that Prince
 Yamabe and Prince Ishikaha had come to proffer their alle-
giance, and that he had therefore kept them at the Barrier.
The Emperor accordingly sent l\Iasubito, ~Iichi no i\tahe, to
 fetch thenl.
    26th day. In the morning, on the bank of the River
Tohogaha, in the district of Asake, he worshipped to\vards the
Goddess Amaterasu no Ohokami. 1 At this time Masubito
.arrived and inforn1ed the Emperor that the men who \vere kept
at the Barrier \vere not Prince Yamabe and Prince Ishikaha,
 but the Imperial Prince Ohotsu, \vho had accordingly come to
join the Emperor, along \vith Masubito. He was followed
 by Yesaka, Ohokida no Kimi, Mitsuna, Naniha no Kishi,
 Oshibito, KOlnada no Sukuri, Yasumaro, Yamabe no Kimi,
 \Vite, Woharida no Omi, Hasetsukabe no Shiki, \Vakami,
 Ohokida no Kinli, l{anemi, Ne no Muraji, Urushibe no Tomose XXVIII.
 and their people. The Emperor was greatly rejoiced. \Vhen 9..
 they were just arriving at the Town Hall, \Voyori came riding
 post, and informed the Emperor, saying :-" Three thousand
 Mino troops, which \vere despatched for the purpose, have
 succeeded in blocking the Fuha road." Upon this the
 Emperor commended \Voyori's zeal. As soon as he reached
 the Town Hall, he sent the Imperial Prince Takechi in advance
 to Fuha to attend to military matters there, and sent
 Yalnashirobe no Woda and Akafu, Ato no Muraji, to mobilize
 the troops of the Tokaidu provinces. Moreover he sent Ihose,
 Wakasakurabe no Omi, and Mate, Hashi no Muraji, to mobilize
 the Tosando army. This day the Emperor lodged at the
 Town Hall of Kuhana. He stayed here, and did not proceed
 further.
    At this time the Afumi Court heard that the Prince
 Imperial, the (late) Emperor's younger brother, had gone to
 the East Country. All the Ministers were alarmed, and the
 capital was in commotion. Some made their escape, with the
 intention of proceeding to the East Country, and others with-
 drew in order to conceal themselves in the mountains and
  I The Sun Goddess, \vhose chief ten1ple \vas, and is, in the southern part

of the province of Ise.
        308                            N II-lONGI.
        marshes. Upon this, the Imperial Prince Ohotomo addressed
        the Ministers, saY'ing :-" What measures shall \ve take?"
        One of the Ministers stood fOI\Vard and said :-" If \ve are slow
        to take measures, we shall certainly be too late. The best plan
        is with all speed to assenlble our choice cavalry and to pursue
        in their track."
            The Imperial Prince did not take this advice, but sent
        Ihasuki,t Ina no I\.imi, !{usuri, Fumi no Atahe, and Ohomaro,
        Wosaka no Atahe, to the East Country, and Momotari,
        I-Iodzumi no Omi, with his younger brother, Iho)Te, and Hiuga,
        Mononobe no Obita, to the Yamato capital. Moreover, he sent
        Wotoko, Saheki no Muraji, to Tsukushi, and Ihate, !(usu no
        Omi, to the province of Kibi, all of them with orders. to levy
        troops. He said further to Wotoko and Ihate :-" These t,vo,
XXVIII. viz. Prince Kurikuma, Vicero~y of Tsukushi, and Hiroshima,
 10.
        Tahema no !{imi, Governor of the province of Kibi, \vere
        originally dependants of the Imperial younger brotller the
         Heir Apparent, and I suspect them of treason. If there is any
         sign of disobedience, slay thenl forthwith." Now when Ihate
        arrived at the province of !{ibi, on the day on which he
        presented his token of authority,2 he deceived Hiroshima, and
        got him to ungird his sword. Ihate then drew his s\\70rd and
         51ew him.
            When Wotoko reached Tsukushi, Prince Kurikuma received
         his token of authority, and said to him in reply :-" The province
         of Tsukushi has always been a defence against the calamity of
         foreign raids. Were these lofty battlements and deep moats
         overlooking the sea meant as a protection from an internal
         enemy? If, in awe of this command, I should nO\\T despatch
         troops, this province would be left unprotected, and if troubles
         were suddenly to arrive unexpectedly, the State would soon be
         overturned. What good would it then do to put me to death
         a hundred times? How can I dare to disregard m)r duty?
         This is my reason for refusing to set the troops in movement
         hastily."
            Now the two sons of Prince Kurikuma, Prince Mino and
          Prince Takebe, stood beside him, girt with their swords, and
          did not withdraw. Hereupon \Votoko grasped his sword as
          about to rush forward. But he feared lest on the contrary he
           1   This name means rock or stone mattock.         2   Lit. tally.
                           TE~l~IU.                         3°9
might himself see destruction, and being therefore unable to
accomplish his purpose, ,vent aWa)T empty.
   Ihasuki and his companions, the couriers to the East, were
approaching Fuha when Ihasuki alone, suspecting that there
were troops among the mountains, fell behind, and went on at
a leisurely pace. Then some ambushed soldiers came out from
the mountain and intercepted I{usuri and the others. Ihasuki,
seeing this, felt sure that I~usuri and his companions would be
captured, so he turned and fled, barely succeeding in making
his escape.
   Just at this time ~Iakuda, Ohotomo no Muraji, and Wofukehi, XXVIII.
                                                                    I I.
Ohotomo no 1v1 uraji, both saw that the time was unfavourable,
so they pretended illness, and \vithdrew to their house in
Yamato. Learning, ho\vever, that the successor to the
throne was certainly the Prince Imperial, the (late) Emperor's
younger brother, resident at Yoshino, Makuda first followed
the Emperor. But 'Vofukehi remained behind, saying :-" I
will establish n1Y fame all at once, and it is my purpose to
allay calamity." So he called to him one or t\VO families of
relations, and all the stout fello\vs he could find, but could only
get a fe\v tens of men.
   27th day. The Imperial Prince Takechi sent a messenger to
the To\vn Hall of Kuhana \\Tith a message for the Emperor,
saying :-" It is inconvenient to carryon the Government with
Your l\fajesty residing at a distance: I \vould advise that some
 nearer place should be occupied."          That same day the
Emperor proceeded to Fuha, leaving the Empress-consort
 behind. By the time he reached the T 0\\1n Hall, Sabichi,
Chihisakobe no ~1 uraji, Governor of the province of Wohari,
joined him \vith a force of 20,000 men. The Emperor forth-
\vith commended him. These troops were divided, and beset
the roads to various places. When he arrived at Nogami, the
 Imperial Prince Takechi came to meet him from \Vasami, and
forthwith addressed the Emperor, saying :-" Last night
couriers came in haste from the Court of .t-\fumi. I therefore
laid an am bush and captured them. They are Kusuri, Furni
no Atahe, and Ohomaro, Wosaka no Atahe. vVhen I asked
them \"here they were going, they answered and said that they
belonged to the suite of Ihasuki, ""ina no !{imi, who was
sent on behalf of the Prince Imperial, the Emperor's younger
        3 10                           NlliONGI.

       brother, resident at Yoshino, to nl0bilize the army of the East
       Country. Ihasuki, ho\vever, seeing the troops burst out, had
       run a\vay back again.
          After this the Emperor addressed the Imperial Prince
       Takechi, saying :-" At the Court of Afumi there are the Oho-
       olni of the Right and Left, and a body of shrewd Ministers,
XXVIIL \vitI1 \vhom to conclude counsel. N ow We have no one to
 12.
       advise with except young children. What is to be done?" The
       In1perial Prince having bared his arms and grasped his sword,
       addressed the Emperor, saying :-" Ho\vever numerous the
       Afnmi Ministers may be, how shall they dare to oppose the
       En1peror's divine spirit? Though thou, the Emperor, art but
       one, thy servant Takechi, in reliance on the spiritual help of
       the Gods of Heaven and Earth, and requesting the Imperial
       orders, ,viII put himself at the head of all the generals, and will
       inflict chastisement on them. Shall he meet with any
       resistance?" The Emperor commended him. He took him by
       the hand and stroked his back, saying :-" Be prudent, and not
       neglectful." He accordingly presented to him a saddle-horse,
       and delivered to him the entire conduct of military matters.
       The Inlperial Prince straight,va~y returned to 'Vasami.
       Upon this the Ernperor established his temporary Palace at
       N ogami and took up his residence there. That night there ,vas
       a violent storm of thunder, lightning and rain. The Emperor
       put up a prayer, saying :-" Ye Gods of Heaven and Earth,
       if ye \,"ill help Us, make the thunder and rain to cease."
       As soon as he had done speaking, the thunder and rain
        stopped.
           28th day. The Emperor went to \\Tasanli. He returned
        after having inspected the military arrangements.
           29th day. The En1peror went to \\Tasami and issued his
        commands to the troops through the Imperial Prince Takechi.
        The Emperor then went back again to N ogami, and abode
        there.
           On this day \Vofukehi, Ohotomo no Muraji, had secret con-
        ference with Kumage, Sakanohe no Atahe, the officer in charge
        during absence. 1 Addressing himself to one or t\VO of the Aya
        no Atahe, he said :-" I shall pretend that I am the Imperial
          1    In charge of the Palace of Okamoto during the En1peror's absence,
        along \vith Prince Takazaka.
                              TE~I~lU.                            3I I
Prince Takechi, and at the head of some tens of cavalry
soldiers, will issue forth and approach the camp from the road
north of the Temple of Asukadera. So do you co-operate
with me secretly." Having done so, he marshalled his troops
at the house of Kudara and issued forth from the South Gate. l
In the first place he caused Kuma, Hada no Miyakko, in his
waist-cloth, to mount a horse and gallop into the camp \vest of XXlPIII.
the Temple and say to them :-" The Imperial Prince Takechi 13·
has arrived from Fuha, followed by' a numerous armed force."
Hereupon Prince Takazaka, who had charge of the Palace in
(the Emperor's) absence, ~lomotari, Hodzumi no Omi, who
had been sent as a messenger to levy troops, and others
repaired to the tsuki tree west of the Temple of Asukadera
and encamped there. But Momotari remained at the arsenal
of W oharida, "'There he transported arms to .l.~fumi. Now when
the soldiery in camp heard Kun1a's outcry, they everyone
dispersed and ran a\vay, and Wofukehi, Ohotomo no Muraji,
with some tens of mounted troops arrived in hot haste.
Rumage and the Atahe fraternized with him, and the -soldiers
also followed. So, saying that it was by command of the
Imperial Prince Takechi, they sent to the arsenal of Vi oharida
and summoned Momotari, Hodzumi no Omi. Upon this
Momotari mounted his horse and came in a leisurely way.
When he reached the tsuki tree west of the temple of
Asukadera, there was a man who said :-" Get down from your
horse." Momotari was slow in doing so, and the man took
hold of his collar, dragged him to the ground, and shot him
with an arrow. Then he drew his sword and smote him, so
that he died. Then Ihoye, Hodzumi no Omi, and Hiuga,
Mononobe no Obito, were bound, but presently released and
placed amongst the troops. Prince Takazaka and Prince
Wakasa were sent for and made to follow the army. When
this was done, Yasumaro, Ohotomo no Muraji, Woyu, Saka-
nohe no Atahe, Sukunamaro, Sami no Kimi, and others were
sent to the Palace of Fuha to report to the Emperor what had
taken place. The Emperor was greatly rejoiced, and accord-
ingly appointed W ofukehi general.
   At this time Takechimaro, Miwa no Kimi, Yemishi, Kamo XX\TIII.
                                                                          14·
  1Probably the official Duildings of the village of Kudara. It will be
remembered that Kudara is Japanese for Pekche, the Corean kingdom.
        3 12                           NIHONGI.

       no Kimi, and others, together with a body of valiant men, all
       joined the general's standard like an echo. 1 A plan was
       drawn up for invading Afumi, and the bravest among the
       troops were selected and made lieutenants, generals, and
       iudges. 2 First of all they marched to\vards Nara.
          Autumn, 7th month, 2nd day. The Emperor sent Abemaro,
       Ki no Omi, Honji, Oho no Omi, I{o-udo,:~ 1fiwa no Kimi, and
       U sagi, Okizome no Muraji, in command of several tens of
       thousands of men, to cross over to Yamato by way of Mount
       ~Iiyama in Ise.      Moreover he sent Woyori, Murakuni no
       Muraji, Nemaro, Fumi no Obito, IZimite, Wanibe no Omi,
       and Abe, Ikago no Omi, in command of several tens of
       thousands of men, with orders to sel forth fronl Fuha and to
       proceed direct to Afumi. Fearing that these troops might be
       difficult to distinguish from the arm)~ of Afumi, he placed a red
       (mark) on their clothing. When this was done, he gave
       separate orders to Honji, Oho no Omi, to take 3000 men and
       encamp on the plain of Tara. Tarumaro, Tanaka no Omi, \vas
       sent with instructions to guard the road to Kurafu.
XXVIII    Now Afumi 4 ordered Prince Yamabe, Hatayasu, Soga no
 IS·   Omi, and Rito, Rose no Omi, to take command of several tens
       of thousands of men and proceed to attack Fuha. They en-
       samped on the bank of the River Inugami. 5 Here Prince
       Yamabe ,vas killed by Hatayasu, Saga no ami, and Hito,
       Kose no ami. The troubles which ensued prevented the army
       from advancing, and Hatayasu, Saga no Omi, returned from
       Inugami and stabbed himself in the throat so that he died. At
       this time, Yakuni, Hata no Kimi, an Afunli general, with his
       son U shi and others, came and surrendered with their people.
       Accordingly he ,vas g'fanted the battle axe and halberd, and "vas
       appointed general. Forthwith he proceeded northwards to
       Koshi. Before this time, Afumi had sent picked troops to
       make a sudden incursion to the village of Tamakurabe, so
       Kama, Idzumo no Omi, was sent to attack thenl and drive
       them off.

          1As the pr0111pt result of Wofukehi's brilliant exploi t.
          2Gunkan, a ternl applied to military officers of high rank and experience
        whose duty it was to watch closely the behaviour of the troops in battle.
        Gubbins.
         3 Or Kobito.             4 i.e. the Court of AfulUi.         ~) In Afullli.
                               'rEM~IU.                             J26

   3rd day. General Wofukehi encamped on the top of Mount
 Narayama. Now Akamaro, Aredawo no Atahe, addressed the
general, saying :-" The old capital is our headquarters. Let
it be well guarded." The general took this advice and accord-
ingly sent Akamaro and Kobito, Imbe no Obito, to guard the
ancient capital. l Upon this, .i\kamaro and the others \vent to
the ancient capital. They removed the planks of the bridges
on the roads and made of them breastworks, which they set up
on the highways in the neighbourhood of the capital, and so
kept guard.
   4th day. General Wofukehi fought a battle \vith Hatayasu, XXVIII.
                                                                 16.
Ohono no Kimi, the Afumi general, at Mount Narayama. He
was defeated by Hatayasu, and his men all ran a\vay. General
Wofukehi barely escaped \vith his life. Thereupon Hatayasu
pursued him as far as Yada, where he \vent up and viewed the
capital, but as there were breastworks set up on all the high-
ways, he suspected an ambush, and by degrees \vithdrew and
retreated.
   5th day. Tanabe no \Vosumi, a lieutenant-general of the
Afumi party, crossed Mount Kafuka and marched to I{urafu
\vith their flags rolled up and dragging 2 their drums. At mid-
night, ,vith gags in the soldiers' mouths,:~ they broke through
the fortifications and suddenly entered the encampment.
Accordingly, fearing that it might be difficult to distinguish
bet\veen his o\vn men and those of Tarumaro, he gave each of
them the vvatchword "Kane." 4 Then they dre\v their swords
and charged, \vhen those who had not the watchword" Kane"
were cut down \vithout more ado. C pan this Tarumaro's
troops ,vere all thro\vn into confusion, and in this sudden
emergency kne,v not \vhat to do. Only Tarumaro cleverly
noted the ,vatch,vord, and he alone, by saying" I(ane," effected
his escape with difficulty.
   6th day. Wosumi again advanced in order to attack the
encampment on the plain of Tara. He arrived there unex-
pectedly. Hereupon General Honji, Oho no Omi, intercepted

  1 Sailllei Tenno's Palace of Okamoto, frequently referred to above.
  ~ Without beat of druD1.
  3 "Chinese soldiers Inaking a night attack are gagged \"ith a piece of

\vood, fastened like a bit, to prevent talking in the ranks.~;-Giles.
  4 Kan e, Ineta 1.
        J26                         NIHONGI.

        him, and pursuing him \vith picked troops, smote him. \Vosumi
        alone made his escape and fled. He never came again after-
        wards.
           7th day. Woyori and his men fought with the Afumi troops
        at the River Yokugaha in Okinaga and defeated them, killing
        their General Kusuri, Sakahibe no Muraji.
           9th day. Woyori and his men attacked the Afumi general,
        Hada no Tomotari, at Mount Takoyama, and slew him.
XXVIII.    On this day, Abemaro, Ki no Omi, and his colleagues, the
 17·
        generals for the Eastern provinces, hearing that 'Vofukehi,
        Ohotomo no ~Iuraji, general for the Yamato capital, had been
        defeated by the Afumi men, divided their army and dispatched
        Usagi, Okizome no Muraji, at the head of more than one
        thousand cavalry in haste to the Yamato capital.
           13th day. Woyori and his men fought a battle on the banks
        of the River Yasukaha, and suffered a great defeat. Oho-
        guchi, Kosobe no Omi, and Chishima, Hashi no Muraji, ,vere
        taken prisoners.
           17th day. The Kurimoto army was attacked and repulsed.
           22nd day. Woyori and his men arrived at Seta. No\v the
        Imperial Prince Ohotomo and his Ministers were encamped
        together west of the bridge, where they formed a great array.
        Their rear could not be seen. Their banners covered the
        plain, the dust reached to the sky: the sound of their drums
        and gongs could be heard for several tens of ri, their ranged
        crossbows were discharged confusedly, and the arrows fell like
        rain. Their General Chison defended it (the bridge) at the
        head of an advanced body of picked troops. He cut the bridge
        in the middle for a space of three rods,l and over the gap he
        placed a long plank. If anyone attempted to cross over by
        this plank, it could be pulled away, and he would fall. In this
        way it was impossible to advance to the attack. Now, there
        was one daring soldier, named Waka-omi, Ohokida no Kimi.
        He laid aside his long spear and, donning double armour, drew
        his sword, suddenly rushed across the plank, and cut the rope
        which was fastened to it. In spite of the arrows, he entered
        their array. The troops were all thrown into confusion and
        dispersed in flight. It was not possible to prevent them.
        General Chison drew his sword and cut down the fugitives~
                                1   Or thirty feet.
                                 TE~I~IU.                                J26

but he ,vas unable to check the rout. Accordingly, he ,vas
himself slain near the bridge, \vhile the I mperial Prince
Ohotomo and the Oho-omi of the Right and Left narro,vl~y
escaped ,vith their lives.
   \Vo)rori and his troops forthwith marched to the foot of the XXVIII.
                                                                 18.
Hill of Ahadzu. On this day Yakuni, Hata no Kimi, and
Koma, Idzumo no ami, besieged the Castle of l\li\vo in concert,
and took it.
   23rd day'. \Voyori and his men slew the Afumi generals
Isokimi, Inukahi no Muraji, and Shihote, Hasama no Atahe,
at the market-place of Ahadzu. Upon this the Imperial Prince
Ohotomo fled, and not having anywhere to go to, turned and
concealed himself at Yamazaki. There he strangled himself.
At this time the Oho-ami of the Right and Left and all the
other Ministers dispersed and were lost. There \vere left only
Mara, Mononobe no Muraji, and one or t,vo toneri who
followed him.
   Before this time General W ofukehi marched towards Nara.
On the day' that he reached Hiyeda, he was told b~y a man
that a numerous force was coming from Kahachi. He accord-
ingly sent Takara, Sakamoto no Omi, Masumi, Naga\vo no XXVIII.
                                                                 19·
Atahe, Maro, Kuragaki no Atahe, W oshibi, Tami no Atahe,
and Nemaro, Hasama no Atahe, at the head of 300 soldiers,
to take up a defensive position at Tatsuta. Moreover, he sent
Sukunamaro, Sami no Kimi, in command of several hundred
men, to encamp at Ohosaka. l Yemishi, Kamo no Kimi, ,vas
despatched with several hundred men to guard the Ihate
road.
   On this day, Takara, Sakamoto no Orni, and his colleagues
halted on the plain of Hiraishi. Hearing that the Afumi
troops were occupy'ing the Castle of Takayasu, they ascended
thither. But the Afumi army, when they found that Takara
and his colleagues were coming, burnt all the granaries of
tax-rice, and then all dispersed and ran away. So they (Takara
and his men) spent the night within the Castle. At daybreak
they looked down to\vards the West, and sa\v a large arm~y
coming from the two directions of OhotSll and Tajihi. Their
flags were clearly visible. Somebody said :-" These are the
troops of Karakuni, Iki no Fubito, the Afumi general. Takara
     1   Not the well-known city of that name, but a place in \Tamato.
        3 16                        NIIIONGI.

        and his colleagues descended from the Castle of Takayasu, and,
        crossing the River Yegagaha, gave battle to Karakuni on the
        west side of the river. But the troops of Takara and his
        colleagues were few, and they ,,,,,ere unable to maintain the
        defence. Before this, Oho-oto, Ki no Omi, had been sent
        with orders to guard the Kashikozaka road. Upon this, Takara
        and his colleagues retreated to I(ashikozaka, and took up their
XXVIII. position in Oho-oto's camp. At this time Shihoko, Kume no
 JO.
        Omi, Governor of I(ahachi, intending to join himself to the
        Fuha Palace, had assembled an army. No\v, \vhen Karakuni
        arrived, he secretly discovered his plans, and was about to sla~y
        Shihoko. Shihoko, finding that the matter had leaked out,
        comnlitted suicide.
            After the lapse of one day, the Afumi army arrived in great
        force by several roads. 1 (Takara and Oho-oto), finding that
        \\rith their joint force they were unable to meet them in battle,
        broke up their camp and retreated.
           On this day General \V ofukehi was defeated by the Afumi
        troops and fled with only one or two mounted n1en. Coming
        to Sumizaka, he chanced to fall in \vith Usagi's division, which
        then came up. So he turned again and encamped at Kanatsu-
        nawi, \vhere he rallied his dispersed troops. Thereupon, he
        heard that the Afumi army was coming by the Ohosaka road,
        and, leading his troops westward as far as Chimata in Tahema,
        gave battle to I(arakuni, Iki no Fubito, by the pond of Ashi-ike. l
        N O\V there was a brave soldier named I(ume, \vho, with dra\vn
        s\vord, rushed straight into the midst of the (enemy's) army'.
        The cavalry advanced close upon his heels, and so the Afumi
        troops all took to flight. They \yere pursued, and a very large
        number slain. Upon this, the general gave orders to his army,
        saying :-" This war was originally undertaken, not ,vith the
        object of killing the common people, but against the ring-
        leaders. Therefore let there be no indiscriminate slaughter."
        Upon this, I(arakuni got separated from his arn1Y and :fled
        alone. The general sa\v him from a distance, and n1ade I~ume
        shoot an arrow at him, but he missed, and I{arakuni succeeded
        at last in making his escape by flight. The general then ,vent
        back again to his headquarters.
            N OVI the Eastern (i\.fumi) army \yas constantly approaching
                                   1   In Yalnato.
                                T em m u.                               31 7
in force. So the arm)" ,vas divided, the ~ivisions taking up
positions respectively on the Upper, Middle, and Lo\ver roads.!
But General V\T ofukehi took charge in person on the ~liddle
road. Hereupon Isogimi, Inukahi no Muraji, the Afumi XXVIII.
                                                                 21.
general, came up b)T the 1liddle road. He halted at Muraya,
and despatched his Lieutenant-GE:neral Kujira, Ihori\vi no
Miyakko, \\"ith 200 picked soldiers to attack the general's
camp. At this time the troops under his standard \vere
but fe\v, and could offer no resistance. N O\V there ,vas a
slave of the Temple of Oho\videra, named Tokumaro, who,
with four others, follo\ved the army. Tokumaro and his com-
panions, forming an advanced guard, went forward and shot
their arrows, so that Kujira's army was unable to advance.
    On this da~y Takechimaro, ~Iiwa no Kimi, and U sagi, Oki-
ZOITle no Muraji, \vho were stationed on the Upper road, fought
 with the ,A.fumi army at the Hashi Misasagi, and greatly de-
 feated them. Follo,ving up their victory, they also cut off the
 retreat of Kujira's army, upon which Kujira's men all broke
 and fled. Many of the common soldiers were killed. Kujira
 made off, mounted on a \vhite horse, but his horse tumbled
 into a muddy rice-field and could make no progress. Then
 General \\Tofukehi said to a brave soldier of Kahi :-" The
 man on the white horse is Ihori\vi no Kujira. Hasten after
 hinl and shoot hinl."    Upon this the brave soldier of Kahi
 hurried in pursuit and came up to Kujira. Kujira whipped his
 horse vigorously, and it succeeded in extricating itself and
 getting out of the mud. Then he galloped off and made his
 escape. The general went back again a second time to head-
 quarters, and encamped his men there. From this time for-
 ward the Afumi troops never came again.
    Before this time, when the army \vas at Kanatsuna\vi.
  Kame, Takechi no Agata-nushi,~ Governor of the district of
 Takechi, suddenly had his mouth closed so that he could not
  speak. After three days, a divine inspiration came over him,

  I "Shiikai" editoes note:-" I gather fronl \vhat is stated belo\v that the

Upper road \vas that of the district of Shiki no Kami, the Middle road that
of the district of Shiki no Shimo, and the Lo\ver road that of the district of
Takechi" (in 'latnato).
  ~ Here \ve have an exalnple of an old territorial noble holding the office
implied by his ancestral title.
  VOL. II.                                                         Y
        3 18                            NIIIONGI.

        and he said :-" I am the God who dwells in the Shrine of
        Takechi, and my name is I(oto-shiro-nushi no KamLl Again,
        , I an1 the God ,vho dwells in the Shrine of Musa, and my name
        is Iku-ikadzuchi 2 no Kami.' This was their revelation :-' Let
        offerings of horses and weapons of all kinds be made at the
        misasagi of the Emperor Kamu-yanlato-ihare-biko. 3 Further
XXVIII. they said :-' \Ve stood in front and rear of the Imperial
 22.
        descendant and escorted him to Fuha, whence we returned.
        \Ve have now again taken our· stand in the midst of the
        Imperial army for its protection.' Further they said :-' An
        army is about to arrive by the \\1estern road. Be on your
        guard.'" \Vhen he. had done speaking, he awoke (from his
        trance). For this reason, therefore, Kome was sent to worship
        at the Imperial misasagi and to make offerings of horses and
        weapons. He also made offerings of cloth 4 and worshipped
        the gods of the Shrines of Takechi and Musa.
           After this Karakuni, Iki no Fubito, arrived from Ohosaka.
        Therefore the people of that day said :-" The words of the
         instructions of the Gods of the two Shrines are in accordance
        with the fact." 5
            Moreover the Goddess of Muraya 6 said by the mouth of a
        priest :-" An army is now about to arrive by the middle road
        of my shrine. Therefore let the middle road of my shrine be
        blocked." Accordingly, not many days after, the army of
        Kujira, Ihoriwi no Miyakko, arrived by the middle road. The
        men of that day said :-" So the words of the teaching of the
        god were right." When the war was over, the Generals
        reported the monitions of these three gods to the Emperor,
        who straightway commanded that the three gods should be
        raised in rank i and worshipped accordingly.
          1 See above, Vol. I. p. 76.
          2 Live-thunder. Another reading is Ikudanla, live-je\veI. This is not
        one of the eight thunder-deities enumerated as having been born fronl the
        putrefying body of the Goddess Izanailli. See above, \lol. I. p. 30. Kome
        ,vas apparently inspired by t,vo gods at once.
          3 Jiu1mu Tenno.

          4 Nusa or l11itegura, no,v represented by the paper gohei.

          5 Referring to the prediction that the Arl11Y of the West ,vas approaching.

          6 Nailled Mifuto hime.

          i There \vere three classes of shrines, Greater, Middle and Lesser. The
        Greater Shrines included those from the senior division of the first rank to
                                TEMMU.                                  J26

   22nd day. When General Wofllkehi had subdued the land
of Yamato, he crossed the ~reat pass 1 to Naniha, while the
other lieutenant-generals, proceeding severally by three routes,
111arched to Yamazaki, where they encamped south of the river.
General Wofukehi, at Wogohori in Naniha, sent for the
Governors of all the \tVestern provinces and made them deliver
up their keys, their posting-bells,2 and posting-tallies.
    23 rd day. The generals, having all met at Sasanami, sought XX\'lII.
                                                                  23·
for and arrested the Prime Ministers of the Left and Right, as
well as all the criminals.
    25 th day. The generals proceeded to the Palace of Fuha,
and before the camp presented to the Emperor the head of the
 Imperial Prince Ohotomo.
    8th month, 25th day. The Imperial Prince Takechi was
 con1manded to announce the verdicts on the Afumi Ministers.
 Eight \vho were found guilty of heinous offences were con-
 demned to suffer the extreme penalty. The Udaijin Kane,
 Nakatomi no ~Iuraji, was accordingly executed at Tane in
 Asawi. 3 On this day the Sadaijin, Akaye, Soga no Omi, the
  Dainagon, Rita, Kose no Omi, and their children and grand-
 children, with the children of Kane, Nakatomi no Muraji, and
 of Hatayasu, Soga no Omi, were all sent into banishment.
 The others without exception were pardoned.
     Before this time, Sabichi, Chihisakobe no Muraji, Governor
  of the province of vVohari, hid in the mountains and commit-
  ted suicide. The Emperor said :-" Sabichi did good service.
  Why should he have committed suicide, not being guilty of
  any crime? Could he have been conspiring secretly? "
     27th day. The Emperor gave his gracious commands to all
  those who had rendered good service, and bestowed on them
  public favour and reward.
     9th month, 8th day. The Imperial car, on its return journey,
  stayed for the night at Kuhana in Ise.
     9th day. It stayed the night at Suzuka.

 the senior division of the third rank; the Middle included those froll1 the
 junior division of the third rank to the junior division of the fourth rank;
 the Lesser included those fronl the senior division of the fifth rank to the
 junior division of the fifth rank. The lands allotted to each shrine and
 the offerings nlade to theln ",'ere regulated accordingly.
    1 Ohosaka.          2 See abo\'e, p. 206.     3 In the province of Afulni.
       3 20                      NIHONGI.

           loth day. It stayed the night at Abe.
           11th da)~. It stayed the night at Nabari.
           12th day. The Emperor proceeded to the Yamato capital
        and took up his residence in the Palace of Shima.
           15 th day. He removed his residence from the Palace of
        Shima to the Palace of Okamoto.
           In this ~year a Palace was erected south of the Palace of
        Okamoto, and the Emperor removed his residence thither that
        same winter. This ,vas called the Palace of Kiyomibara in
        Asuka.
XXVIII.    Winter, 11th month, 24th day. Kinl Ap-sil and other Silla
 24·
        guests ,\~ere entertained in Tsukushi. The same day presents
        were made them, varying in the case of each.
           12th month, 4th day. All those who had rendered good
        service were chosen out, and higher cap-ranks conferred on
        them, from that of Shosen upwards, varying according to
        circumstances.
           15th da)r. A ship was given to the Silla guests.
           26th day. Kim Ap-sil and his companions took their
        departure.
           In this month Takami, Wina no Kimi, of Daishi rank, died.
                          BOOK XXIX.

THE EMPEROR AMA NO NUNA-HARA              OKI NO MABITO.-PART II.


                       (TEMMU TENNO.)

2ND year, Spring, 1st month, 7th day. The Ministers were A.D. 673·
entertained at a banquet at which sake was provided.
  2nd month, 27th day. The Emperor commanded the
functionaries to prepare an arena, in which he assumed the
Imperial Dignity at the Palace of Kiyomibara in Asuka. He
raised his wife to the rank of Empress-consort. 1 She bore to
him His Highness 2 the Imperial Prince Kusakabe. Before
this he had taken to him the Empress-consort's elder sister,
the Imperial Princess Ohota,3 and made her his consort. She
gave birth to the Imperial Princess Ohoki, and the Imperial
Prince Ohotsu. His next consort was the Imperial Princess
Ohoye. 4 She gave birth to the In1perial Prince Naga, and
the Imperial Prince Yuge. His next consort, the Imperial
Princess Nittabe/ gave birth to the Imperial Prince Toneri.
Moreover the Lady Higami no Iratsume, daughter of the Oho-
ami, Fujihara, bore to him the Imperial Princess Tajima.
Another lady, named Ihohe no Iratsume, younger sister of
Higami no Iratsume, bore to him the Imperial Prince
Nittabe. Next the lady 6 Oh.onu no Iratsume, daughter of the
Oho-ami Soga no Akaye, bore to him one son and two XXIX. 2.
daughters. The first was called the Imperial Prince Hodzumi ;
 1   Afterwards Jito Tenno.                             2 Mikoto.

 3   Daughter of Tenchi, therefore his niece.
  .. Another daughter of Tench! Tenno.
  a Another daughter of Tenchi Tenno.
  IS In Japanese otoji, in Sinico- Japanese fujin, a term applied to the
Ilnperial concubines of lower rank.
        322                           NIHONGI.

         the second was called the Imperial Princess Ki; the third was
         called the Imperial Princess Tagata. The Emperor before this
         had taken to him Princess Nukada no Iratsume, daughter of
         Prince Kagami,l who gave birth to the Imperial Princess
         Towochi. Next he took to him Amako no Iratsume, daughter
         of Tokuse, 1funagata no Kioli, who bore to him His Highness 2
         the Imperial Prince Takechi; next a daughter of Ohomaro,
         Shishibito no Omi, named Kaji-hime no Iratsume, who bore to
         him two sons anq two daughters. The first was called the
         Imperial Prince Osakabe; the second was called the Imperial
         Prince Shiki; the third was called the Imperial Princess
         Hatsusebe; the fourth was called the Imperial Princess Taki.
            29th day. Cap-ranks were conferred on those who had
         rendered good service, varying according to circumstances.
            3rd month, 17th day. The Governor of the province of Bingo
         caught a white pheasant in the district of Kameshi and sent it
         as tribute. Accordingly the forced labour due from that dis-
         trict was entirely remitted, and a general amnesty granted
         throughout the Empire.
            In this month scribes were brought together who began to
         copy out the " Issaikio " 3 in the Temple of Kaharadera.
XXIX. 3.    Summer, 4th month, 14th day. With the view of sending
         the Imperial Princess Ohoki to attend upon the Shrine of
         Ama-terasu no Oho-kami, she was made to dwell in the
         Abstinence-palace 4 of Hatsuse. This was that she might first
         purify herself before she by-and-by approached the place
         where the Goddess was.
            5th month, 1st day. The Emperor gave command to the
          Ministers of State, the Daibu, as well as to the Omi and
          Muraji, and also the Torno no Miyakko, saying :-" Let those
         who first take service (under Government) be at the outset
          employed by the Ohotoneri. 5 Afterwards let them be allotted
          to suitable offices, selection being made according to their

           1 These and the following concubines seeln to have had no special rank

         or position.
           2 Mikoto.

           3 The Buddhist canon or Tripitaka.   A copy presented to the Bodleian
         Library or British MuseUln by a Japanese nobleman was brought to the
         British Legation, Tokio, in two carts.
           4 See Vol. I. p. 176, note.                  ~ High Chamberlain.
                                  TEM~IU.                                  32 3
capacities. Moreover, let the waiting-women who offer their
services be received freely, without respect of married and un-
married. or of old and young. In selecting them for particular
duties let the rules of the (female) palace officials be followed."
   29th day. Sakamoto no Takara no Omi, of the Upper
Daikin rank, died. In consideration of his services during
the (war of) the year Midzunoye Saru,! the posthumous rank
of Sh6shi was conferred on him. 2
   Intercalary 6th month, 6th day. Sa-thek Syo-myong of
Pekche, of Lower Daikin rank, died. He ,vas of a wise and
intelligent nature, and in his day had a reputation for ability.
The Emperor was shocked at his death, and by a special
favour granted him the posthumous rank of Outer Shoshi.
In addition to this he conferred on him the rank of Prime
Minister 3 in his o\\'n country.
   8th day. Tamna sent Princes Kumaye,' Tora, Uma,' etc.,
with tribute.
   15th day. Silla sent Kim Seung-won, of Han Ason rank, XXIX. 4-
Kim Chi-san, of the rank of Ason, the Te-sya Sangsyol
and others to congratulate the Emperor on his accession to
the throne. At the same time Kim Sal-yu, of Il-kil-son rank,
Kim Chi-san, of Han Na-ma rank, and others were sent tc
offer condolence on the decease of the late Emperor. [One
book says as Tribute-Envoys.] The Escort-Envoys Kwi V-po
and Chin-n1o escorted Seung-won and Sal-yu to Tsukushi.
   24th day. Kwi V-po and the others were entertained at
Tsukushi, and received presents varying in the case of each.
They straightway returned to their country from Tsukushi.
  Autumn, 8th month, 9th day. The Emperor made an order
setting forth the good services rendered during the year Midzu-
noye Saru by Abemaro, Ki no Omi, and others, while stationed
in the province of Iga, and publicly conferred on them favour
and rewards.
  1  A.D. 672.
  2  The first instance of posthumous honours In Japanese history. This
institution is of Chinese origin.
   3 Te-sa-phyong.

   • See above, XXV· I I. 20, \vhere he is called Prince Kumaki.
   & Tora in Japanese means tiger, and Uma horse.        Is it possible that the
natives of Queloaert at this time spoke a Japanese dialect? Prince Tora
is mentioned below, XXIX. 18.
         324                          N Il-IONGI.
            20th day. Koryo sent the Te-hyong Han-chit, Witu 1 of the
         Upper Division, the Te-hybng Syok-u of the ~'ormer Division,
         and others with tribute. .'\ccordingly Silla sent Kim Ni-ik, of
         Han Na-ma rank, to escort the Koryo Envoys to Tsukushi. 2
            25th day. Kim Seung-won and the other Envoys sent to
         congratulate the Emperor on his accession-twenty-seven guests
         of middle and upper rank-were summoned to the capital.
         Accordingly the Emperor instructed the Viceroy (of Tsukushi)
         to declare his wishes to the Tamna Envoys, saying :-" The
         Emperor has newly reduced the Empire to peace, and has
         only just now assumed the Imperial Dignity. For this reason
         he does not invite to his Court any other Envoys than those
         who bring congratulations, as you yourselves have observed.
         Moreover the weather is cold, and the waves are mountainous.
         To detain you longer here would be rather distressing to you
         than otherwise. You would therefore do well to take your
         departure without delay." Accordingly the King resident in
         that country and his Envoys, Kumaye and his colleagues, were
         for the first time granted the cap-rank of Upper Dai-otsu,·
         which moreover was adorned with brocade and embroidery,
         and corresponded to the rank of Cha-phyong (Minister) in
         that country. So they returned home from Tsukushi.
            9th month, 28th .day. Kim Seung-won and his colleagues
         were entertained at Naniha. There ,vas a performance of
         music of all kinds, and they received presents varying in the
         case of each person.
            Winter, 11th month, 1St day. Kim Seung-won took his
         departure.
            21st day. Han-cha of Koryo, Sal-yu of Silla, and their
XXIX. 5. people, were entertained at Oho-gohori 4 in Tsukushi, and
         received presents varying in the case of each.
            12th month, 5th day. Presents were given to all those who
         were in attendance on the Emperor at the feast of first-fruits, 5
         viz. the Nakatomi and Imbe, with the officials of the Shinto
          department, the district governors of the two provinces of

           1 A title.
           2 Koryo had at this time been overthrown by China.
           3 This ,vas apparently the rank conferred on the Envoys, that bestowed

         on the King not being tnentioned. Cha-phyong was a Pekche rank.
           4 Or Ohokuni.                                   5 Ohonihe.
                                 T em m u.                              325
 Harima and Tamba,t and also to the labourers under them. A
grade of cap-rank was accordingly conferred on each of the
district governors.
   17th day. Prince Mino, of Sh6shi rank, and Katamaro, !{i
no Omi, of Lower Sh6kin rank, were appointed Commissioners
for the erection of the great Temple of Takechi [now Ohomiya
no Ohodera]. Now Fukurin, the priest appointed as super-
intendent, declined this office on account of age, but he \vas
not allowed to refuse.
   27th day. The Buddhist Priest Gisei was made Junior
S6dzu.~ On this day there were conjoined t\VO additional
priests as clerks. I t was at this time that the practice of
having four clerks first began.
   This year was the year Midzunoto Tori (roth) of the Cycle.
   3rd year, Spring, 1st Inonth, loth day. Prince Chhyang- A.D. 674.
syong of Pekche died. He was granted the rank of Outer
Shoshi. 3
   2nd month, 28th day. Abemaro, Ki no Omi, died. The
Emperor was much g-rieved, and in consideration of his services
in the campaign of the year ~lidzunoye Saru bestowed on him
the rank of Daishi.
   3rd month, 7th day. Ohoku~i, Woshiumi no Miyakko,
Governor of the province of Tsushima, reported that silver had
been produced for the first time in that province, and sent
some as tribute. Ohokuni ,vas accordingly a\varded the rank XXIX. 6.
of Lower Shokin. It \vas at this time that silver \vas first
produced in Japan. Offerings were therefore made of it to all
the Gods of Heaven and Earth, and presents of it were like\vise
given to the Daibu, etc., of the rank of Shukin and above.
   Autumn, 8th month, 3rd day. The Imperial Prince Wosa-
kabe was sent to the shrine of Isonokami to brighten up the
 Divine precious things with oil. On the same day, the
 Emperor decreed, saying :-" Let all the precious things
originally deposited in the Sacred Treasuries by the various
 Houses be returned to their descendants."

    1 Whence the rice for the ceremony \\ras provided. See Florenz's instruc-
ti ve note on this passage.
    2 Vide supra, p. 153.

    a Chhyang-syong \vas a grandson of \Vi-cha, the last king of Pekche
His father took refuge in Japan on the downfall of the dynasty.
         326                           NIHONGI.

             Winter, roth month, 9th day. The Imperial Princess Oho-
           ki left the Abstinence-palace of Hatsuse and proceeded to the
           shrine of Ise. 1
 A.D. 675·    4th year, Spring, 1st month, 1st day. The various students
           of the Department of Education, the Department of the Yin
           and Yang,2 the Outer Apothecaries' Department, the woman
           of S'ravasti,S the woman of Tara, Prince Syon-kwang of
           Pekche, and the Silla labourers offered presents of drugs and
           rarities.
             2nd day. From the Imperial Princes downwards all the
           public functionaries presented their respects to the Emperor.
             3rd day. All the public functionaries, from the initial rank
           upwards, presented fire\vood. 4
             5th day. A platform was for the first time erected from
           which to divine by means of the stars/i
             7th day. A banquet was given at Court to the Ministers.
             17th day. The Ministers of State, Daibu, and all the public
           functionaries from the initial rank upwards had an archery
           meeting in the Court of the Western Gate.
XXIX. 7.     On this day, moreover, the province of Yamato presented an
           auspicious bam-door fowl, the Eastern provinces presented a
           white falcon, and the province of Afumi presented a white
           owl. 6
             23rd day. Offerings 7 (of cloth) were made at the various
           shrines.
             2nd month, 9th day. The Emperor gave orders to the
           provinces of Yamato, Kahachi, Settsu, Yamashiro, Harima,
           Ahaji, Tamba, Tajima, Afumi, Wakasa, Ise, Mino, and
           Wohari, saying :-" Seek out in your jurisdiction men and
           women of the common people who can sing well, and also
           dwarfs and jugglers,8 etc., and send them as tribute."
          1  See above, XXIX. 3.
          2  This Departlnent ,had charge of astronomy and calendar-lnaking, with
        observations on the \veather.
           3 See above, XXV. 57.
           4 A regular yearly practice first mentioned here.

           S The close association of astrononly and divination may be inferred

        from this.
           6 The interlinear Kana has tobi, i.e. kite.

           7 Mitegura.
           S The \vord used includes jugglers, acrobats, et hoc ~enus omne.
                                 T em m u.                              327

   13 th day. The Imperial Princess Towochi 1 and the
Imperial Princess Abe 2 proceeded to the shrine of Ise.
   15th day. The Emperor decreed, saying :-" Let the serfs
granted to the various Uji in the year Kinoye Ne 3 be hence-
forvvard done away with. Moreover, let the mountains,
marshes, islands, bays, woods, plains, and artificial ponds
granted to Princes of the Blood,4 to Princes and to Ministers
and Temples,5 be all done away with from first to last."
   19th day. The Emperor issued an edict as follo\vs :-" Ye
Ministers, functionaries, and people of the Empire, avoid the
commission of offences of all kinds. If there be any who dis-
obey this, they shall be punished according to circumstances."
   23rd day. The Emperor proceeded to the Castle of
Takayasu.
   In this month Silla sent Prince Chhyung-won, the Te-kam
Keup-son 6 Kim Chhaso,i the Te-kam Nama Kim Thyon-
chhyung, the Tye-kam Te-ma, Pak Muma, and the Tye-kam
Te ·sya, Kim Naksyu, to offer tribute. Their Escort-Envoys,
the Nama, Kim Phungna, and the Nama, I{im Hyopok, escorted
Prince Chhyung-\von as far as Tsukushi.
   3rd month, 2nd day. The great God of Tosa presented a XXIX                   8.
divine sword to the Emperor. s
   14th day. Kim Phungna and the others were entertained
at Tsukushi. They forthwith returned home from Tsukushi.
   16th day. Prince Kurikuma, of the fourth rank, was
appointed Director of Military Affairs, and Miyuki, Ohotom 0
no Muraji, of Upper Shukin rank, was made Tayu. 9

  1  Daughter of Telunlu Tenno.
  2  Daughter of Tenchi Tenno, afterwards the Empress styled Gemmei
Tenno.
  a The third year of the previous reign, viz. A.D. 664 .
  .. Including the brothers, sisters, and children of the Emperor; others are
simply 3:, i.e. kings, by which princes are meant.
   ~ Temples are Buddhist telnples; the v.·ord "shrine" is used in this
translation for Shinto places of worship.
   6 Tekam is the name of an office, Keupson of a rank.

   7 Another reading is Piso.
   S One authority calls him H ito-koto-nushi no Mikoto, another says that

he was Mi..suki-taka-hiko-ne no Mikoto. It is explained that the priests
presented the sv.'ord at the bidding of the god.
  !)   'Tice-minister.
         J26                             NIIIO~G[.

             In this month Koryo sent the Te-hy·ong 1 Pok-kan, the Te-
          h)'ong Tamu and others with tribute. Silla sent the Keupson,
           Pak Keun-syu, and the Te-na-ma, Kim ~lika, to offer tribute.
             Summer, 4th month, 5th day. More than 2400 priests and
          nuns \vere invited to a great feast of vegetable fare.
             8th day. Hiromaro, Tahema no Kimi, of Upper Sh6kin
          rank, and Maro, }{unu no Omi, of Lo\ver Shokin rank, were
          forbidden by the Emperor to attend at Court.
             9th day. The Emperor decreed as follows :-" In regard
          to lending out the tax-rice, henceforward let the circumstances
          of the peasants be clearly ascertained, and their condition as
          to poverty or ,vealth having been learned in advance, let them
          be arranged in three classes, to the lovver two of \vhich such
          loans may be ll1ade."
             loth day. Prince Mino, of Shushi rank, and Hirotari,
          Saheki no M uraji, of Lower Shukin rank, \vere sent to offer
          prayers to the Wind-Gods at Tateno in Tatsuta. 2 Ohobuta,
XXIX. 9. Hashibito no Muraji, of Middle Shokin rank, and Karainu,3
          Sone no Muraji, of Middle Daisen rank, \vere sent to \vorship
          the Oho-imi Deity at Kahawa in Hirose. 4
             14th day. Mara, Kunu no Omi, of Lo\ver Sh6kin rank, was
          convicted of offering resistance to an Imperial messenger, and
          stripped of all his offices and dignities.
             17th day. The Emperor issued a decree to the provinces,
          saying :-" Henceforth the fishernlen and hunters are to be
          restrained from making pitfalls or using spear-traps and such
XXIX. 10. like contrivances.      Moreover, from the 1st day of tIle 4th
          month until the 13th day of the 9th month, let no one

            1 Te-hyong    (great elder- brother) is an official rank, Pok-kan his
         nalne..
            t In Yaluato.    This is the first of a regular series of such notices. The
         litany to the Wind-Gods is preserved in the" Yengishiki," and has been
         translated by Sato\v. See" T.A.S.].," Vol. VI I. p. 416. I refrain from
         quotation, as the study of this treatise is indispensable to anyone \vho is
         at all interested in the study of Shinto.
            I This name lneans "Corean dog."

            • In Yamato. Oho-itni 111eans great religious abstinence. I'he Deity's
         proper nanle \vas Waka..uka-hilne, i.e. the young-food-Iady. For a full
         account of this service see Satow's "Ancient Japanese Rituals," in the
         "T.A.S.].," "01. VII. p. 412. It "rill be observed that neither Buddhist
         nor Shinto \vorship was neglected by this En1peror.
                                  TE~I~lU.                               J26

set fish-traps, closing the space. 1 I~urther, let no one eat the
flesh of kine, horses, dogs, monkeys, or barn-door fo,vls. 2 This
prohibition does not extend to other kinds of meat. Offenders
against this regulation ,viII be punished."
   18th day. Prince \Varni, of the third rank, \vas guilty of an
offence and was banished to Inaba. One of his children was
banished to the island of Idzu,3 and another to the island of
Chika. 4
   23rd day. A selt;ction was made of persons possessed of
accomplishments. They ,vere granted presents, which varied
in each case.
   In this month Prince Chhyung- \\l6n of Silla arrived at
Naniha.
   6th month, 23rd day. Yesaka, Ohokida no Kimi, \vas ill, and
was about to die. The Emperor was greatly shocked, and
made an order, saying :-" Thou, Yesaka, hast devoted thyself
to the public service, neglecting thy private affairs. Without
sparing thy life, prompted by thy n1anl)~ spirit, thou hast
laboured in the great campaign. It has been my constant
desire to show thee affection, and therefore, even \vhen thou
art gone, thy descendants will receive liberal rewards." He
accordingly raised him to the rank of Outer Shushi. Not
many days after he died in his private dwelling.
   Autumn, 7th month, 7th day.           Kunimaro, Ohotomo no
Muraji, of Upper Shukin rank, was sent to Silla in the capacity
of Chief Envoy. Irishi, Miyake no Kishi, of Lower Sh6kin
rank, accompanied him as Associate Ambassador.
   8th month, 1st day. Prince Kumaki, the tribute Envoy of XXIX. II.
Tamna, anchored at Tsukushi.
   22nd day. There was a storm which made the sand to fly,
and damaged houses.
   25t h day. Chhyung-won, the ceremonies heing completed,
took his departure. He set sail from N aniha.
   28th day. The Tribute-Envoys of the two countries, Silla

  1 Hima-sakiri.    Apparently a particular kind of fish-trap is meant. The
" Shi1kai " editor olnits this word, considering it a gloss which has crept in
frOlll the mar~in.
  2   Buddhist influence is obvious here.
  3   Probably Ohoshima (called by foreigners \"ries Island) is meant.
  " In Hizen.
          330                            NIHONGI.

           and Koryo, were entertained in Tsukushi, and gIven presents
           which varied in each case.
              9th month, 27th da}T. Prince Ko-yo of Tamna arrived at
           Naniha.
              Winter, loth month, 3rd day. Messengers were despatched
           in all directions to seek for the Issaikio. 1
              loth day. The Ministers were entertained at a banquet with
           sake.
              16th day. Thirty men of Thang were forwarded as tribute
           from Tsukushi. They \vere forthwith sent to the province of
           Totomi and settled there. 2
              20th day. The Emperor made an edict., saying :-" Let
           everyone, from the Princes down to those of initial rank,
           provide himself with \",capons." On this day there was a
           report received from the province of Sagami that in the
           district of Takakura a \voman had given birth to three male
           children. 3
              11th month, 3rd day. A certain man ascended the hill east
           of the Palace, and having uttered words of evil omen,4 cut his
           throat and died. Those who were on duty on that night
           received everyone a step in rank. There \vas a great earth-
           quake in this month.
 A.D. 676.    5th year, Spring, 1st month, 1st da~y'. The Ministers and
           public functionaries paid their respects at Court.
              4th day. There \vcre granted to all, from the Imperial Prince
           Takechi down to the Daibu of Sh6kin rank, upper garments,
           trousers, lined garments, girdles, garters, staffs, and arm-rests.&
           But to the three grades of Sh6kin rank arm-rests were not
           granted.
XXIX. 12.     7th day. Grants were made to the Daibu of Sh6kin rank
           and upwards, varying in each case.
              15th day. The functionaries from the initial rank upwards
           presented firewood. On the same day they all assembled in
           the Court, and were entertained at a banquet.
           1 See above, XXIX. 2.
           2 The Chinese \vere at war with Silla at this time.
           3 No stigma seems to" have been attached to this.   On the con trary, there
         are instances of the Elnperor giving presents to \VOnlen \vho had borne a
         multiplicity of children.
           4 No doubt abusive language towards the En1peror is meant.

           i See above, p. 25 6.
                              TEMMU.                              33 1
   16th day. Prizes were offered for archery in the Court of
the Western Gate. Those who hit the target received prizes
of values which varied according to circumstances.
   On this day, the Emperor occupied the Palace of Shima, and
gave a banquet there.
   25th day. The Emperor made a decree, saying :-" In all
cases of appointments as Governors of provinces, let men of
not higher than Daisen rank be appointed. This rule does
not apply to the Home provinces nor to the provinces of
Michinaku and Nagata."
   2nd month, 24th day. A ship was presented to the Tamna
guests.
   In the course of this month, Kunimaro, Ohotomo no 1Iuraji,
and his colleagues arrived from Silla.
   Summer, 4th month, 4th day. Worship ,vas paid to the
Wind-Gods of Tatsuta and to the Oho-imi Deity of Hirose}
   Adzumi no Hoshi, of the district of Lo\ver Sofu, in the
province of Yamato, sent tribute of an auspicious cock which
had a comb like the f!o\ver of a camellia.
   On this day a report was received from the district of
l\.kunami, in the province of Yamato, that a hen had become
changed into a cock.2
   14th day.    A decree was issued to all the Princes and
Ministers, saying :-" Let those ,vho are in receipt of taxes
from fiefs cease to receive them fronl the Western provinces,
and let them be granted revenues from the Eastern provinces XXIX. 13.
in exchange. Moreover, let all persons from the outer a pro-
vinces \vho wish to enter our service be permitted to do so,
\vhether they be the sons of Omi, Muraji, Torno no Miyakko,
or even the sons of I{uni no ~fiyakko. Further, let men of
distinguished ability be allo\ved to do so, even though
they are of the common people, of lower rank than the
above."
   2znd day.     The Emperor gave orders to the Governor
of the province of Mino, saying :-" Let the children of
 Abemaro, Ki no Omi, ~esident in the district of Toki, be

  I See above, XXIX. 9.
  2 Ominous occurrences of this kind are frequently recorded in Chinese
and Corean history.
  , All except the Gokinai or Hotne provinces.
         33 2                            NIHONGI.

          removed to the East country and become peasants of that
          country."
             5th month, 3rd day. A decree was promulgated respecting
          the offences of Governors of provinces who had failed to pay
          over their commuted taxes at the limited time; etc., etc.
            7th day. The Governor of the province of Shimotsuke
          represented to the Emperor that, o\ving to a bad year, the
          peasantry in his domain were starving and wished to sell their
          children. The Court refused permission.
             In the course of this month the Emperor forbade the cutting
          of grass or firewood on Mount Minabuchi and Mount Hosokalla.
          Moreover, indiscriminate burning and cutting were forbidden
          on all mountains and plains in the Home provinces as to which
          a prohibItion had always existed.
            6th month. Prince Kurikuma, of the fourth rank, died of
          disease.
             Mononobe no Wogimi no Muraji took suddenly ill and died.
          When the Emperor heard this he was greatly shocked. In the
          campaign of the year Midzunoye Saru, he had followed the
          Imperial carriage to the East country. In consideration of his
          great services the Emperor showed him favour by conferring
          on him the rank of Inner Daishi. He also granted him the
          seniority among those of his House. 2
            This summer there was great drought. Messengers were
          sent to all quarters to make offerings of cloth and to pray to all
          the gods of Heaven and Earth. Moreover, the priests and
          nuns were invited to offer supplications to the Three Preciou~
          Things. Still there was no rain, and therefore the five grains
          did not grow, and the peasants were starving.
            Autumn, 7th month, 2nd day. The Ministers, Daibu and
XXIX. 14- public functionaries received an increase of rank, each according-
          to his deserts.
            8th day. The Tamna guests returned to their own countr)9.
            16th day. Worship was paid to the Wind-Gods of Tatsuta
          and' to the Oho-imi Deity of Hirose.

           1 The taxes (not the grain tax) due in the middle decade of the 8th mont1't

         were payable into the exchequer, for near provinces before the end of the
         loth month, for provinces of medium distance before the end of the 11th
         month. for more d'istant provinces before the end of the 12th month.
           2 Uji.
                                TE~I~tU.                                333
   In the course of this month, \Voyori, 11urakuni no Muraji,
died. In consideration of the services rendered by him in the
campaign of the year Midzunoye Saru, he received the
posthumous rank of Outer Shushi.
   A star appeared in the East, seven' or eight feet in length.
In the 9th month it at length disappeared from the sky.
   8th month, 2nd day. Sustenance fiefs, varying in each case,
were granted to all from the rank of Prince of the Blood down
to Daibu of Shokin rank, and also to Imperial Princesses,
Princesses and lady officials of the Palace.
   16th day. The Emperor commanded, saying :-" Let a Great
Purification be held in all quarters. The articles needed for
this purpose are to be forwarded to the shrines of purification
by the Kuni no Miyakko of each province, to wit, one horse and
one piece of cloth. The other things are to be supplied by the
 governors of districts, viz., each one sword, one deerskin, one
 mattock, one smaller sword, one sickle, one set of arrows, and
one sheaf of rice in the ear. Further, let each house provide a
 bundle of hemp." 1
    17th day. The Emperor issued a decree, saying :-" Let all
 sentences of death, confiscation, or the three classes of banish-
 ment be mitigated one degree. 2 As for crin1es punishable by
 removal to another part of the same province or lesser offences,
 let them all be pardoned whether they have been detected or XXIX. 15·
 not.
    This pardon, however, does not apply to persons who have
 already proceeded to their place of banishment."
   1 "The Oho-barabi or Great Purification was the Ill0st solemn ceremony
of the Shinto religion. I t was performed t\vice a year, on the 30th day of
the 6th and 12th months, by the Princes of the Blood and the 1\1 inisters,
who assembled for the purpose at the Gate of the Scarlet Bird. The urabe
or diviners read the norito or fornlula, which had the effect of dissipating
(harai) demoniac influences."-Yamada's Dictionary.
    The litany used on this occasion is comnlonly called the Nakatomi no
Oho-barahi. I t has been preserved, but is unfortunately not one of those
 translated by Satow. Dr. Florenz promises us a translation of all the
norito.
    ~ The three classes of banishment are :-Ist, to near provinces, as Echizen
or Aki; 2nd, to provinces of mediuol distance, as Suwo or Iyo; 3rd, to
 distant provinces, as Idzu, Aha, Hitachi, Sado, Iki, or Tosa. The confiscation
 IS of the persons of the criminals and their falnilies into slavery in public
 offices. This practice is still followed in Corea.
   VOL. II.                                                         Z
334                              NIHONGI.

    On this day the Emperor commanded the various prOVInces
to let loose living things.!
   In this month, Oho-miwa no Makamuta no Kobito no Kimi
died. When the Emperor heard this, he was much grieved,
and in view of his services in the year Midzunoye Saru granted
him the posthumous rank of Inner Sh6shi with the posthumous
title of Ohomiwa no Makamuta no Mukahe-gimi.
   9th month, 1St day. Owing to the rain, the beginning of the
month was not announced. 2
   loth day. The Princes and Ministers sent ~gents to the
capital and to the Home provinces and gave out weapons for
(man of each the population).
   12th day. Prince Yagaki, of the third rank, Viceroy of
Tsukushi, was guilty of an offence, and was banished to Tosa.
   13th day. Presents were made to the public functionaries
and to men of the frontier states, varying in the case of each.
   21st day. The Department of the Shinto religion repre-
sented to the Emperor as follows :-" We have ascertained by
divination the provinces and districts which are to supply the
rice for the festival of the first-fruits. There respond to the
divination the district of Yamada, in the province of Wohari,
for the Yuki, and the district of Kasa, in the province of
Tamba, for the Sugi." 3
   In the course of this month Ikadzuchi,4 Sakata no Kimi, died.
In view of his services during the year Midzunoye Saru he was
granted the posthumous rank of Daishi.
   Winter, 10th month, 1st day. The Ministers were enter-
tained at a wine-feast.
   1 A Burldhist practice.  At the present day beggars may be seen at the
gates of Buddhist temples with vessels containing small lampreys or cages
of sparrows, which the faithful are allowed to release on paying a small sum.
   2 There was an old custom in China of announcing the beginning of the

Inonth to the ancestral temples of the Emperors. But the practice in Japan
seems to have been different. There are notices of Japanese Emperors
"viewing the announcement of the new nl0nth from a balcony," etc.
   :i 'luki means" ceremonially pure," and sugi means" next."    These terms
are applied to two qualities of rice used for this festival. Various explana-
tions are given. One is that the yuki ,vas for sacrifice to the Gods of
Heaven, the sugi for the Gods of Earth. Yuki is etymologically connected
\vith imi, religious abstinence. The divination was by burning a tortoise-
shell.
   4 Thunder or thunder-bolt.
                                 TE~IMU.                                  335
   3rd day. Offerings of cloth were made to all the Ahimbe
Gods 1 of Heaven and Earth.
   loth day. Mara, Mononobe no Muraji, of Upper Dai-otsu XXIX. 16.
rank, was sent to Silla as Chief Envoy, and Momotari,
Yamashiro no Atahe, uf Middle Dai-otsu rank, as Junior Envoy.
   11th month, 1st day. On account of the festival offirstfruits, the
ceremony of announcing the first day of the month was omitted.
   3rd day. Silla sent Kim Chhyong-phyong, of Sason rank, to
request governance.~ At the same time, Kim Hoyu, of Keup-
son rank, the Tye-kam, Kim Heum-kil, of Te-sya rank, and
others were sent to offer tribute. The Escort-Envoy Phi
Chinna, of Nama rank, and his associate Hopok, of Nama
rank, escorted Chh)~ong-phyongand the others to Tsukushi.
    In this month seven men of Su-shen 3 arrived in the train of
Chhyong-phyong and his colleagues.
    19th day. The Emperor gave orders to the provinces near
the capital to release living things. 4
    20th day. Men \\'ere sent to all parts to expound the Kon-
kwo-myo Sutra and the N in-a Sutra.
    23rd day. Koryo sent Ha-ll, Chyupu S of the After Division,
as Chief Envoy, and Tok-pok, Te-kyong of the Former Divi-
sion, as Associate Envoy, to offer tribute. Therefore Silla
sent Kim Yang-\von, of Te Nama rank, to escort the Koryo
Envoys to Tsukushi.
    It was intended this year to make the capital at Nihiki, and
therefore all the rice-fields and gardens within the precincts,
public and private property alike, were not cultivated and
became totally \vaste. In the end the capital was not made
 there. [This passage is omitted in some books.]
    6th year, Spring, 1st month, 17th day. There was archery A.D. 677.
at the South Gate.                                                    XXIX. 17.
    2nd month, 1St day. Mara, Mononobe no Muraji, arrived
 from Silla.
   1 The Ahimbe (for ahi-nihe) was a festival celebrated on the 1st day of

the hare in the 11th lTIonth. It ,vas, like the nihi-name, \vhich was celebrated
a little later, a festival of firstfruits. On this occasion the Emperor first
partook of sake, bre"'ed from the new season's rice, which was also offered
to the Karoi. This ceremony was Inore particularly associated with certain
deities, which were therefore termed the Ahilnbe deities.
  2 To ask advice on matters of government (?).

   3 Manchus.              4 See above, XXIX. IS.              Name of office.
           33 6                            NII-JONGI.

             In this month an entertainment was given to men of
           Tanegashima 1 under the tsuki tree west of the Asuka Temple.
             3rd month, 19th da)'. The Silla Envoys, Chhyong-phyong
           and the guests of lower rank to the number of thirteen, were
           invited to the capital.
             Summer, 4th month, 11th day. Nagura Saita no Fubito,
           was convicted of scoffing at the Imperial 2 car, and was
           accordingly banished to the island of Idzu.
             14th day. The Escort-Envoys, Chinna and the rest, were
           entertained in Tsukushi, and straightway returned home from
           there.
             5th month, 1st day. The ceremony of announcing the first
           day of the month was omitted.
             3rd day. The Emperor granted to the Oho-hakase,3 a man
           of Pekche named Sol-tan, the rank of Lower Daisen, and
           accordingly bestowed on him a fief of 30 houses. On this day
           Otokashi, the Yamato no Yeshi,~ ,vas granted the rank of
           Lower Shosen and a fief of 20 houses.
             7th day. A man of Silla named Pak Chapha, of Ason rank,
           accompanied by three attendants and three Buddhist priests,
           was driven by stress of weather to the island of Chikashima.&
             28th day. The Emperor gave orders to the Shrines of
           Heaven and the Shrines of Earth that the sacred rice-tax
           should be divided into three shares, one of which was to be set
           apart for the offerings to the Gods and the other two given to
           the Kannushi.    I)


             In this month there was drought in the capital and the
           Home provinces, and prayers were made for rain.
             6th month, I4th day. There was a great earthquake.
             In this month the Emperor commanded the Yamato no Aya
           no Atahe, saying :-" Your family has from the beginning been
XXIX. 18   guilty of the seven misdemeanours. From the W oharida i reign
           down to the Court of Afumi it has been the Emperor's constant
              1 An island off the south coast of Satsuma.    I t is notable as the place
           visited by Mendez Pinto and his companions in 1542, and ,\\7here they first
           taught the inhabitants the use of firearms. Tanegashima means a pistol in
           Japanese at the present day.
             2 The Emperor is meant, but the writer does not dare to introduce him in

           such a connection.
             3 Great Doctor.               .. Yamato painter.              {) In Hizen.
             Ii Shinto priests.            '; Suiko Tenno.
                                TEMj\fU.                                337
business to take measures against you. Now in this aUf reign
you deserve to be called to an account for your misconduct,
and to receive condign punishment. We are very reluctant,
however, to extirpate the House 1 of Aya no Atahe, and we
therefore extend to you great clemency and pardon you. But
henceforth if any of you offend his crime shall surely be ranked
among unpardonable offences."
   Autumn, 7th month, 3rd day. \Vorship was paid to the
Wind-Gods of Tatsuta and to the Oho-imi Deity of Hirose.
   8th month, 15th day. A great feast of Buddhist fare was
given at the Asuka Temple~ at \vhich the" Issaikio " 2 was read.
The Emperor stood at the South Gate of the Temple, and did
obeisance to the Three Precious Things. At this time he
commanded the Princes of the Blood and the other Princes as
well as the Ministers each to furnish one person to renounce the
world. These persons were chosen without distinction of age
or sex, and all entered religion in accordance with their wishes.
They therefore took part in this great feast.
   27th day. Kim Chhyong-phyong returned to his o\vn
country. Accordingly Pak Cha-pha and the other who had been
driven by stress of \veather to Japan were delivered to Chhyong-
 phyong and the rest, and sent back to their native land.
   28th day. Tamna sent Prince Tora with tribute.
   9th month, 30th day. A decree was made, saying :-" Let
 vagabonds who come back again after having been sent to
their native places be, one and all, set to forced labour."
   Winter, loth month, 14th day. Momoye, Kahabe no ami,
of Inner Upper Sh6kin rank, \vas appointed Minister of the
 Interior/i and Maro, Tajihi no Kimi, of Inner Lower Daikin
 rank, was made Daibu 4 of the province of Settsu.
   11th month, 1st day. O\\ring to rain the ceremony of
 announcing the 1st day of the month was not observed.
   The Viceroy of Tsukushi presented to the Emperor a red XXIX. 19.
 crow. a The Viceroy's officials accordingly received presents,
  1   Uji.                 ~ The books of the Buddhist canon, Tripitaka.
  3   Mimbukio, or in Japanese Kakibe no Kin1i.
  4 Frain the enun1eration of his functions in the" Shokuinrio," this official

seen1S to have been a governor \vilh very comprehensive po\vers.
   5 A red crow with three legs was supposed to inhabit the sun.         The
appearance of one on earth \vas accounted the 1110St favourable of OJnens.
See above, Vol. I. p. 116, note.
          J26                        NIHONGI.

           each according to his rank. ~Ioreover the person who specially
           caught the red crow was granted five steps in rank. Also the
           local officials of the district in question had their rank raised.
           Consequently the taxes were remitted to the peasants of this
           district for the space of one year. On this day a general
           amnesty was proclaimed to the Empire.
              21st day. The festival of first-fruits was held.
              23rd day. A meal was given to all the public functionaries
           who possessed a definite rank.
              27th day. Presents were given to the officials of the Shinto
           Department and to the local governors who had assisted in the
           offering of first-fruits.
              12th month, 1st day. Owing to the snow the ceremony of
           announcing the 1st day of the month was not observed.
A.D. 67 8.    -7th year, Spring, 1st month, 17th day. There was archery
           at the South Gate.
              22nd day. The Tamna people set out for the capital.
              This spring, as a preparation for worshipping the Gods of
           Heaven and Earth, a purification ,vas held throughout the
           Empire. An Abstinence-palace was erected on the bank of
           the Kurahashi river.
              Summer, 4th month, 1st day. The Emperor ,vished to
           proceed to the i\bstinence-palace, and held divination for this
           purpose. The response fell upon the 7th day. Accordingly,
           at the hour of sunrise the officers whose business it was to
           clear the road having already started, and the public function-
           aries being formed in line of procession, the Emperor took his
           seat in his palanquin, and ordered his canopy, but had not yet
           set out, when the Imperial Princess Towochi suddenl)T took ill,
           and died ,vithin the Palace. For this reason the cortege was
XXIX. 20. stopped, and the Emperor \vas unable to proceedo The result
           was that the Sacrifice to the Gods of Heaven and Earth did
           not take place.
               13th day. A pillar of the "'estern Hall of the Ne\v Palace
           was struck by lightning.
               14th day. The Imperial Princess To\vochi was buried at
            Akaho. The Emperor ,vas present, and was graciously pleased
           to raise lament for her.
               Autumn, 9th month. Yoshimaro, Oshinomi no 1'Iiyakko,
            presented to the Emperor five auspicious stalks of rice. Each
                                  TEl\fl\IU.                            339
stalk had branches. In consequence, all sentences from that
of minor banishment 1 downwards were remitted.
    Prince Wakasa, of the 3rd rank, died.
    Winter, loth month, 1st day. At Naniha there fell a rain
of something like floss silk. 2 I t was five or six feet long and
seven or eight inches wide. It floated on the ,vind and waved
from the fir woods and reed plains. The people of that day
called it " sweet-dew."
    26th day. The Emperor issued a decree, saying :-" Let
 all civil and military officials of the central and provincial
.governments every year consider the degree of competence of
 their subordinates from the rank of clerk up\\Tards, who are
 animated by a disinterested public spirit and discharge their
 duties with zeal and respect, and let them determine accord-
 ingly the promotion they should receive. Not later than the
 first decade of the first month they should forward a full report
 to the judge. 3 Thereupon the judge, having compared and XXIX.21
 decided, shall submit (his recommendation) to the Daiben-
 k,van. 4 However, when officers are ordered to go on missions
 of a public nature and refuse for trifling reasons-not genuine
 illness or mourning for parents-they are not to be placed in
 the schedule for promotion."
    12th month, 27th day. Bramblings;; fie'" from south-,vest
 to north-east, covering the sky.
    In the course of this month there ,vas a great earthquake in
 Tsukushi. The ground split open to the \vidth of t"vo rods
 and a length of more than 3000 rods. !\{any of the peasants'
 houses in all the villages were brought do,vn in ruins. At this
 time there ,vas a peasant's house situated on the top of a hill.
 On the evening of the earthquake the hill crumbled do\vn and
 changed its place. Yet the house remained intact and \va~
  1 This no\v Ineans ~, hard labour," but probably ,vc should here follo\v the

Ineaning given by Giles.
  ~ Several cases of th is phenolllenon are recorded in Chinese and Japanese
history. Kanro, ~r sweet-c1e\v, is the Chinese translation of the Sanskrit
Alnrita, the ambrosial food of the Imlnortals.          :~ Ho-kwan, c'l.~ .~.
  "Benkwan. The executive department of the supreme Council of State
or Dajokv.ran. Hepburn.
  ~) Atori in Japanese. " Fringilla Montifringilla. Large flocks of this bird
are found in \vinter near Yokohama. It is the saIne as the European
species."- Blakiston and Pryer in "~r.A.. S.J .:,
         34°                         N IHONGI.
           not destroyed, and the inmates did not know that the hill had
           come down and that their house had moved away. When it
           became daylight, however, they discovered what had happened,
           to their great amazement.
              In this year the Silla Escort-Envoys, Ka-ryang Chyong-san, of
           Nama rank, and Kim Hong-sye, of Nama rank, came to
           Tsukushi, and said :-" The King of Silla having despatched
           I{im Syo-mul, of Keup-son rank, Kim Sye-sye, of Te-nama
           rank, etc., as Envoys to bring this year's tribute, I, Chyong-san,
           was sent to escort Syo-mul and his colleagues. In mid-ocean,
           however, we chanced to meet with a storm, in which Syo-mul
XXIX.22 and tIle others became all dispersed, and I know not what has
           become of them. I, Chyi)ng-san, alone have with difficult),
           succeeded in reaching the shore." Syo-mul and his colleagues
           never arrived.
 A.D. 679·    8th year, Spring, 1st month, 5th day. The Silla Escort-
           Envoys Ka-ryang Chyong-san and Kim Hong-sye, etc., pro-
           ceeded to the capital.
              7th day. The Emperor issued a decree as follows :-" At
           the New Year let the Princes, Ministers, and public functionaries
           refrain from paying their respects to anj~ persons except rela..
           tives of the grade of elder brothers or elder sisters and above,
           or to the senior members of the House. The Princes must
           not pay their respects even to their mothers, when the latter
           have not the title of Princess; nor must Ministers pay their
           respects to their mothers when the latter are of mean rank.
           Even on other ceremonial occasions than the New Year the
           same rule is to be observed, and those who infringe it shall be
           punished according to circumstances."
              8th day. There was archery at the West Gate.
              2nd month, 1st day. Koryn sent Hwan-heum, Te-syang of
           the Upper Division, Sa Syu-Iu, Te-syang of the Lower Division,
           and others to offer tribute. Accordingly, Silla sent Kam
            Mul-Ia, of Nama rank, to escort Hwan-heum and his colleagues
            to Tsukushi.
              3rd day. Katamaro, Ki no Omi, died. In consideration of
           his services in the year Midzunoye Saru,t he received the
            posthumous rank of Upper Daikin.
              4th day. The Emperor issued an edict, saying :-" When
                                        1   67 2 •
                                 TE~I~IU.                               34 l
 the year I{anoto 1vli 1 is reached, let there be a revie\v ~ of the
 \veapons and horses belonging to the Princes of the Blood,
 the ~linisters, and the public functionaries. TheI efore let
 l]fovision be made in advance."
    In this month the Emperor was most graciously pleased to
extend his charity to the poor and needy, and to give alms
 to those starving from cold and hunger.
    3rd month, 6th day. \Vakami, Ohokida no I~imi, of the
 Imperial guard, died.~ During the great canlpaign of the year
 Midzunoye Saru, he led the van in breaking the camp of Seta."
 For this service he \vas granted the posthunloUs rank of Ollter
 Upper Shukin.
    7th day. The En1peror proceeded to \Vochi, \vhere he did XXIX
                                                           i)


reverence to the ~Iisasagi of the Later Okamoto Empress. fl
    9th day. Prince Ishikaha, Vicero)- of Kibi, took ill and died
 in Kibi. \Vhen the Emperor heard this he \vas deepl~y grieved,
and \vas most graciously pleased, etc., etc., to confer on hinl
the posthumous honour of Prince of th::~ second class.
    2znd day. Alms of floss silk and cloth \vere given to poor
priests and nuns.
    Summer, 4th month, 5th day. 1"'he Emperor made a decree,
saying :-" Let the history of those temples \vhich have
sustenance-fiefs attached to them be considered, and \vhere
addition is desirable, let addition be nlade; ,,,here they should
be done a\vay \vith, let them be done a\vay \vith.'"
    On this day the names of the temples \\~ere fixed..
    9th day. \Vorship \vas paid to the Deities of Hirose and
Tatsuta.
    5th month, 5th day. 1"'he Emperor proceeded to the Palace
of Yoshino.
    6th day. 1"'he Emperor addressed the Empress Consort,
the Imperial Prince l~usakabe, the Imperial Prince Ohotsu,
the Imperial Prince Takechi, the Imperial Prince Kahashima,
the Imperial Prince Osakabe, and the Imperial Prince Shiki,
   1 A.D. 68 I.                                    2 A ,,·apensha\\-.

  a There is a scale of Chinese characters for death, according to the rank
of the person. Here the character ;E is used, \vhich, as the "Tsusho       j)


commentator points out, is ilnproper, this ch~racter being elnployed only in
the case of nlen of the 6th or lower ranks.
  4 See above, XXV I I 1. 17.   tIe is there called \\r a ka-on1i.
  ;) In Yan1ato.                                  6 Sain1ei 'renna.
         34 2                          NIHONGI.

         saying :-" We wish to-day to unite with you in making a vow
         in the Court, so that after a thousand years 1 there may be no
         trouble. What think ye?" The Imperial Princes answered
         together, saying ;-" The reasonableness of this is manifest."
         Accordingly, His Highness the Imperial Prince Kusakabe
         stood forward first and made oath, saying :-" Ye gods of
         Heaven and Earth, and ye Emperors, bear witness! We,
         elder and younger brothers, young or of mature age, more than
         ten Princes in all, born each of different mothers, without
         respect of birth from the same or different mothers, together
         comply with the Emperor's behest, and ,viII give each other
         mutual support and avoid contention. If, from this time
         forward, any of us should not keep this vow, may he himself
         perish and may his line become extinct! There will be no
         forgetfulness or failure."
            The (other) five Imperial Princes took oath together in the
         above terms in order one after another, and thereupon the
         Emperor said :-" Ye, my sons, though each born of different
         mothers, are now in affection as if born of one mother."
         ,,~ccordingly, loosening out his collar,2 he took the six Imperial
         Princes to his bosom, and made oath, saying :-" If We
         contravene this oath, may Our body perish instantly!" The
         Empress-consort's oath was like that of the Emperor.
            7th day. The Emperor's car returned to the Palace. 3
            loth day. The six Imperial Princes together paid their
         respects to the Emperor before the Great Hall.
            6th month, 1st day. Hail fell as big as peaches.
            23 rd day. Prayer was made for rain.
XXIX.24·    26th day. Ohotomo no Moriya no Muraji, of Upper Daikin
         rank, died.
            Autumn, 7th month, 6th day. Prayer was made for rain.
            14th day. \Vorship ,vas paid to the Deities of Hirose and
         ~ratsuta.
          17th day. Prince Katsuraki, of the 4th rank, died.
          8th month, 1st day. The Emperor ordered that the various
         Houses should send tribute of women. 4
           1  i.e. after nlY death.
           2  A Chinese luetaphorical expression equivalent to "giving vent to his
         feelings."
           a }t"'rool Yoshino.          4 For the service of the Palaces no doubt.
                              TE~L\IV.                             343
  11th day.   The Emperor went to Hatsuse and held a banquet
by the Todoroki 1 pool.
    Before this, the Emperor had addressed an edict to the
Princes and Ministers, saying :-" In addition to the usual
riding-horses let there be got ready other good horses which
can be furnished whenever called for." Accordingly on the day
on which he returned to the Palace from Hatsuse, he inspected
the spare good horses of the ~finisters at the roadside by the
post-station of Tomi, and made them all try their speed.
    22nd day. Oshikatsu, Katsura no ~fiyakko, presented to the
Emperor auspicious stalks of grain. Though from various plots,
they had similar ears. 2
    25th day. Prince Ohoyake died.
    9th month, 16th day. The Envoys sent to Silla returned and
paid their respects at Court.
    23rd day. The Envoys sent to Koryo and the Envoys
 sent to Tamna returned, and paid their respects at Court
together.
    Winter, loth month, 2nd day. The Emperor made a decree,
saying :-" We are informed that of late there have been in the
 the town a many persons guilty of crimes of violence. Now this
 is the fault of the Princes and Ministers. Sometimes, when they
 hear of such criminals, they find it too much trouble, so they
 put up with them, and do not suppress them; sometimes when
 they see such wicked men, out of negligence they conceal the
 fact, and do not correct them. Now if they chastised them
 when seen or heard of, is it likely that there \vould be crimes of
 violence? This being so, if there be in future no shirking of
 trouble or negligence, if those in higher stations punish the
 offences of those beneath them, and if those in lower stations
 remonstrate with their superiors when they are guilty of
 violence, then the country will be well governed."
     11th day. There was an earthquake.
     13th day. The Emperor made regulations for the style of
 priests and nuns and for the colours of the priestly garb, also for

  1 Todoroki means to n1ake a runlbling noise-evidently an onoluatopoetic

\vord.
  2 Supposed to be en1blen1atic of the concord bet\veen the six Ilnperial

Princes.
  J i.e. in the capital.
            344                             NIHONGI.

          the character of their suites of men and~ 110rses when passIng
XXIX. 25· along the streets. 1
             17th day. Silla sent Kim Hang-na, of Ason rank, and Sal
          Nyu-seng, of Sason rank, with tribute. The tribute consisted of
          such things as gold, silver, iron, sacrificial cauldrons with three
          feet, brocade, cloth, hides, horses, dogs, mules, and camels-
          more than ten kinds in all. 1"'here were also, distinct from
          these, presents for the Emperor, the Empress-consort, and the
          Prince Imperial, of gold, silver, swords, flags and the like-a
          certain number of each.
             In the course of this month, the Emperor made a decree,
          saying :-" Ordinarily priests and nuns reside within their
          temples, and observe the Three Precious Things. In the case
          of aged persons, however, or those ,vho by disease are per-
          manently confined to bed in a narrow chamber, of those in
          short whose old age or ill-health allows them no facility of move-
          ment, places which should be pure are made impure. For this
          reason, let all such persons in future apply each to relations or
          friends to build for them in vacant spaces one or two dwellings
          where the aged can be nourished and the sick take medicine."
             11th month, 14th day. There was an earthquake.
             23rd da)·. Tsura, Yamato no Umakahibe no Miyakko, of
          Lower Dai-otsu rank, ,vas sent to Tanegashima as Chief Envoy,
          and !(o-kan, Kami no Sukuri, of Lower Shu-otsu rank, as
          Junior Envoy. Accordingly one grade of rank was bestowed
          on them.
             In this month barriers were constructed for the first time on
          Mount Tatsuta and Mount Ohosaka. Moreover Naniha built
          an outer line of fortifications.
XXIX. 26.    12th month, 2nd day. In consequence of the auspicious
          stalks of grain,~ presents ,vere made to the Princes of the
          Blood, the Princes, the Ministers, and the public functionaries,
          each according to his rank. There ,vas an amnesty for all
          offences from capital crimes downwards.
             In this year the district of Ito, in the province of Kil, sent
          tribute of the herb of long" life. It resembled a mushroom in
          appearance. Its stem \vas one foot long, and its crown two
              1 The "Yengishiki ,: contains regulations for the nUlubers ofJnen by which

            priests of various ranks might be attended in public.
              2 See above l XXIX. 24.
                                   TEM~tU.                                 345
spans in circumference. Moreover, the province of Inaba sent
tribute of auspicious rice, each stem of which had branches.
   9th year, Spring, 1st month, Rth day. The Emperor occupied A.D. 680.
the Little Opposite Palace, \vhere he gave a banquet to the
Princes and Ministers in the Court of the Great Hall. On
this day he granted a surname I to Kobito, Imbe no Obito,
and called him M uraji. Accordingly he presented his joyful
acknowledgments along with his younger brother Shikobuchi.
   17th day. All [roIn the l">rinces of the Blood down to the
officials of Sh6ken rank engaged in archery at the South
Gate.
   20th day. It \\'as reported from the Province of Settsu that
at the village of Ikuta, peach trees and plum trees had borne
fruit.
   2nd month, 18th day. A sound resembling that of drums
was heard in the Eastern quarter.
   26th day. There \vas a tnan \vho said :-" I got a deer's
llorn on Mount Katsuraki. This horn branches into t\VO at the
root. It is united at the end, and has flesh, over which flesh
there is hair. 1'he hair is one inch in length. Thinking this
wonderful, I offer it as a present to the Emperor." It ,vas>
perhaps, the horn of a Lin.~
   27 th day. Eight Silla labourers ,,'ere sent back to their o\vn
country. The Emperor graciously besto\ved presents on them,
varying in the case of each.
   3rd month, lotl1 day. The IJrovince of Settsu sent tribute of
a white shitodo.:i                                                 XXIX. 27.
   23rd day. The Emperor went to Aki in Uda.
   Summer, 4th month, loth day. "lorship ,vas paid to the
Deities of Hirose and Tatsuta.
   11th day. A fire broke out in the nuns' quarters of the
Tachibana Temple.~ Ten rooms ,vere burnt.
   I This is not really a grant of a Sllrnalnc, but a step in the ranks of the
nobility, as from an carl to a nlarquis,
  2 One of the four supernatural creatures of Chinese tradition, and regarded

as a happy portent, on its alleged appearance, of the advent of good govern-
ment. I t has the body of a deer, the tail of an ox, and a single horn.
  3 Described as a small bird of a reddish colour, resclnbling a SpalTO\v.   It
has a ring round the eyes, and black spots on the \vings.          It frequents
ITIountains.
  4 In Yall1ate, founded by Shotoku Datsht.
         346                               NIHONGI.

             25th day. The Silla Envoys Hang-n'a and his companions
          were entertained in Tsukushi, and received presents each
          according to his rank.
             In this month an Imperial decree was issued as follows:-
          " Henceforward let all temples, with the exception of the two
          or three great national temples, cease to be administered by
          officials. But for those which hold a sustenance-fief, a limit
          from first to last of thirty years is fixed. This will be discon-
          tinued when, upon calculating the years, the number of thirty is
          completed. Moreover the Temple of Asukadera ought not to
          be included in those administered by officials, but as it was
          originally a Great Temple, always administered by officials, and
          has also done good service formerIJ',l-for these reasons it is
          still retained in the class of officially administered temples.
             5th month, 1St day. By order of the Emperor coarse silk,
          floss silk, raw silk, and cloth were bestowed on the twenty-
          four temples within the capital, the amount varying in each
          case.
             On this day the expounding of the "Kon-kwo-myo Sutra"
          was begun in the Palace and in the various temples.
             13th day. Kor~yo sent !vIyo-mun of the Southern Division
          as Chief Envoy, Ch~yun-tok, who was Te-kyong of the Western
          Division, and others \vith tribute. Accordingly Silla sent
           Ko-na, of Te-nama rank, to escort the Roryo Envoys Myo-
          mun and the others to Tsukushi.
             21st day. Tsunade, Hada no Miyakko, of Lower Daikin
          rank, died. On account of his services during the year Mid-
          zunoye Saru, he received the posthumous rank of Upper
          Daikin.
             27th day. Mara, Hoshikaha no Omi, of Middle Shokin
           rank, died. On account of his services in the year Midzunoye
           Saru, he received the posthumous rank of Daishi.
XXIX. 28.    6th month, 5th da)~. The Silla guests, Hang-na and his
           colleagues, returned to their own country.
             8th day. There ,vas a rain of ashes. 2
             14th day. There was a great thunderstorm.
           1 No doubt in the civil ,yar of 672, one of the battles of which took place

         close to this temple.
           2   A later history Inentions another rain of sOlnething like ashes.   The
         old peasants called it " Flo\vers of rice."
                                TE:\IMU.                               347
  Autumn, 7th month, 1st day. A branch of the tsuki tree I
west of the Temple of Asuka broke of itself and fell.
   5th day. The Emperor went to the house of Ohotomo,
Agata no Inukahi no Muraji, and visited him in his illness,
bestowing on him great favour, etc., etc.
  On this day there was prayer for rain.
  8th day. Worship was paid to the Deities of Hirose and
Tatsuta.
   loth day. A red bird 2 perched on the Southern Gate.
  17th day. Komaro, Yenowi no Muraji, was granted the
rank of Lower Sh6kin.
   20th day. Kocho, priest of the Temple of Asuka, died.
The Imperial Princes Ohotsu and Takechi were sent on a visit
of condolence.
   23rd day. Ihatoko, Miyake no Muraji, of Lower Shukin
rank, died. On account of his services during the year Mid-
zunoye Saru, he was given the posthumous rank of Lower
Daikin.
   25th day. Prince Toneri, of the 5th rank, who held the joint
offices of Nagon ~ and Minister of the Household, took ill and
was on the point of death, so the Imperial Prince Takechi
was sent to ask after him. He died the next day. The
Emperor was greatly shocked, and sent the Imperial Princes
Takechi and Kahashima to be present at his temporary inter-
ment and to make lament for him. The public functionaries
followed their example and made lamentation.
   8th month, 5th day. The officials of the department of law .
gave tribute of auspicious stalks of grain. Beginning on this
day, for three days there was rain with floods.
   14th da~y. There was a storm which broke trees and
damaged houses.
  9th month, 9th day. The Emperor visited Asatsuma. XXIX.29
  I  Already mentioned several times.
  :2 'The red bird is symbolical of the Southern quarter of the Heavens in
Chinese astronomy. A favourable Olllen.
  3 More    comlnonly dainagon, i.e. Great N agon, a Councillor of State.
Defined by the Walni6sh6 as Ohoi lnono Dlafusu tsukasa, i.e. "the great
official \vho says things" (\vho acts as intennediary in cOlnluunications to
the Emperor).
  4 It appears above that one duty of this departlnent was to give judf{lUent

respecting claims for promotion.
                               N IIIONGI.
Accordingly he inspected the horses of the officials from the
rank of Daisen downwards at Nagara no mori. 1 He also
had archery practised on horseback.
   23rd day. There was an earthquake.
   27th day. Prince Kuhachi died in his private residence.
   Winter, roth month, 4th day. The Emperor commiserated
the needy common people and also the monks and nuns of the
temples within the capital and- gave them alms. Each monk
and nun received four hiki of coarse silk, four bundles of floss
silk, and six tan of cloth, while the Shami 2 and tll0se in white
garments:J received each two hiki of coarse silk, t\VO bundles
of floss silk, and four tan of cloth.
   11th month, 1st day. There was an eclipse 4 of the sun.
   3rd day. There was a brightness in the East from the hour
of the Dog to the hour of the Rat. D
   4th day. Nineteen men of Kory·o returned to their own
country. These were condolence envoys \vho came over on
the occasion of the mourning for the later Okamoto Empress. 6
They had been detained and had not ~yet taken their depar-
ture.
   7th day. The Emperor issued an edict to the officials,
saying :-" If anyone knows of any means of benefiting the
state or of increasing the welfare of the people, let him appear
in Court and make a statement in person. If what hQ says is
reasonable, his ideas will be adopted and embodied in regula-
tions."
   loth day. There was thunder in the West.
   12th day. The Empress-consort was un\velI. (The Em-
peror,) having made a vo"" on her behalf, began the erection
of the Temple of Yakushiji/ and made one hundred persons
enter religion as priests. In consequence of this she recovered
 her health.
   On this day an amnest.y was granted.
  1  Grove of Nagara.                       2 S'ramanera or Buddhist novices.

  :i i.e. the laity, a I~uddhist expression.
  4 The " Shiikai" quotes a statement that this eclipse was of 9t tenths, or

nearly total.
  ;, 8 p.m. to 12 midnight. An aurora (?).                 6 SaiOlei.

  i Yakushi niorai is in Sanskrit Bhechadjyaguru, the genius of medicine.
This temple was afterwards removed to a site near Nara. Vide Satow's
Handbook, p. 383.
                                 TEMl\IU.                                  349
  16th day. There was an eclipse of the moon. l
  The Imperial Prince Kusakabe was sent to pay a visit of
inquiry to the Priest Yemio. On the following day Priest
Yemio died, and the three Imperial Princes were sent to make
a visit of condolence.
   24th day. Silla sent Kim Va-phil, of Sasan rank, and Kim
Won-seung, of Te-nama rank, to offer tribute. Three student
interpreters arrived in the suite of Ya.phil.                          XXIX. 30
  26th day. The Emperor took ill. For this reason one
hundred persons were made to enter religion as priests, and he
presently recovered.
  30th day. Bramblings covered the sky, fly'jng from south.
east to north-west.
   loth year, Spring, 1st month, 2nd day. Offerings were A.I) 681.
distributed to the Gods of Heaven and Earth.
  3rd day. The various functionaries paid their respects at
Court.
  7th day. The Emperor occupied the Opposite Little Hall,
and gave a banquet there. On this day the Princes of the
Blood and the Princes were introduced into the inner reception
Chamber while the Ministers were all in attendance in the outer
reception Chamber. For both alike sake was provided and a
musical performance given. On this occasion Oho-gata,
Kusakabe no Kishi, of Upper Daisen rank, was granted the rank
of Lower Daikin, and the title was bestowed on him of N aniha
no Muraji.
   11th day. By an Imperial decree, Ihadzumi Sakahibe no
Muraji was granted a fief of sixty houses and received a present
ofthirty pieces of coarse silk, a hundred and fifty kin of floss silk,
one hundred and fifty tan of cloth, and a hundred mattocks.
   17th day. All from the Princes of the Blood down to the
rank of Shoken 2 had archery in the Court.
   19th day. Orders \vere given to the Home and other
provinces to repair the Heavenly and Earthly (Shinto) shrines.
   25th day. The Emperor and Empress-consort took their
places together in the Great Hall of Audience,3 and having
summoned before them the Princes of the Blood, the Princes
and the Ministers, addressed them as follows :-" It is OUf
      1   Of 7~ tenths.                   2 'fhe initial or lowest rank.
                   3 'fhe Taikyokuden.   See above, p. 19r.
  VOL. II.                                                        A a
          35°                             NIHONGI.

           desire now anew to enact regulations and to reform the laws.
           Do ye,therefore join with us in executing this enterprise. But
           if we were to proceed suddenly with this business, affairs of state
           would suffer. It will therefore be proper to make a division of
           men before going on."
              On this day, His Highness the Imperial Prince Kusakabe
           was made Prince Imperial and was accordingly associated with
           the Emperor in the conduct of the myriad machinery of state.
              29th day. The Lady Abe died.
              30th day. Toyoharrla Tahema no Kimi, of Shoshi rank,
           died.
              3rd month, 3rd day. The Lady Abe was buried.
              r6th day. The Emperor took his place in the Great Hall of
           Audience, and there gave orders to the Imperial Princes Kaha-
XXiX 3 1 • shima and Osakabe, to Prince Hirose, Prince Takeda, Prince
           I{uhada, and Prince Mino, to Michichi, Kamitsukenu 1 no Kimi,
           of Lower Daikin rank, Kobito, Imbe no Muraji, of Middle
           Shokin rank, Inashiki, Adzumi no Muraji, of Lower Sh6kin
           rank, Ohogata, Naniha no Muraji, Ohoshima, Nakatomi no
           Muraji, of Upper Daisen rank, and Kobito Heguri no Omi, of
           Lower Daisen rank, to commit to writing a chronicle of the
           Emperors, and also of matters of high antiquity. Ohoshima
           and Kobito took the pen in hand. themselves, and made notes. 2
              20th day. There was an earthquake.
              24th day. The Emperor took his place by the well of the
           New Palace, made trial of the sounds of drums and flutes and
           caused them to be practised in harmony.
              Summer, 4th month, 2nd day. Worship was paid to the
           Deities of Hirose and Tatsuta.
              3rd day. A prohibitory law in 92 articles "vas established,
           and was accordingly promulgated with the following words : -
           " The costumes of all fr.om the Princes of the Blood down to
           the common people, and the wearing of gold and silver, pearls
           and jewels, purple, brocade, embroidery, fine silks, together
XXIX. 32. with woollen carpets, head-dresses and girdles, as well as all
           kinds of coloured stuffs, are regulated according to a scale the
           details of which are given in the written edict."
            1 Now K6dzuke. Michichi has the curious ll1eaning-of 3000•
            2 This command led ultilnately to the cOlnpilation of the" Kojiki."   Vide
          Ch. !(., p. 9 et seqq
                                TEM~IU.                               35 1
   12th day. The title of Muraji was granted to Wokida,
Nishikori no Miyakko, Yoshimaro, Tawi no Atahe, Mukutari
and Ihakatsu, Sugita no Kurando,l Agata, Kahachi no Atahe,
Kagami, Oshinomi no Miyakko, Yoshimaro, Aretawo no Atahe,
Momoye and Oshidzuki, Ohokoma no Miyakko, Tatsumaro,
Yamato no Atahe, Ohoshima, Kadobe no Atahe, Ohi, Shishi-
bito no Miyakko, and Yamashiro no Koma no Ikamaro, fourteen
persons in all.
   17th day. An entertainment was given in Tsukushi to the
Koryo guests Myo-mun and his people. Each received presents
according to his rank.
   5th month, 11th day. Worship was paid to the august spirit
of the Emperor'ts grandfather. 2 On this day the Emperor
issued a decree, s-aying :-" The deference paid by public
functionaries to the Palace officials 3 is far too great. Some-
times they go to their doors and address their plaints to them,
sometimes they pay court to their houses 4 by offerings of
presents. If there should be any such cases in future, the
offenders will be punished according to circumstances."
   26th day. Myo-mun of Koryn took his departure.
   6th month, 5th day. The Silla guest Va-phil ,vas enter-
tained in Tsukushi. He (and his suite) received presents
varying in the case of each.
   17th day. Prayer was made for rain.
   24 th day. There ,vas an earthquake.
  Autumn, 7th month, 1st day. A red sparrow was seen.
  4th day. Tsukura, U neme no Omi, of Lower Shokin rank,
was sent to the Land of Silla as Chief Envoy, and Tate, XXIX. 33-
Tahen1a no Kimi, as Junior Envoy.
   On this day Hirotari, Saheki no Muraji, of Lower Shokin
rank, was sent as Chief Envoy to the Land of Koryn, and
Maro, Woharida no Omi, as Junior Envoy.
   loth day. \Vorship was paid to the Deities of Hirose and
Tatsuta.

    1 Storekeeper.

   :; He 'was not an Emperor, and therefore not included in the genera
\\'orship paid to the Emperors. Or perhaps \\?ith Florenz we should under-
stand by grandfather ancestors generally. The original does not indicate
nUlnber.
   :~ Felnale.                            01 i.e. families.
         35 2                             NI1IONGI.

             30th day. Orders were given to the whole Empire to hold
          a great Purification ceremony.l At this time the Miyakko of
          each province supplied one slave to the Shrine of Purification,
          and thus did purification.
             Intercalary 7th month, 15th day. In fulfilment of a vow of
          the Empress-consort a great feast of vegetable fare was given,
          and the Sutras were expounded in all the Temples of the
          capital.
             8th month, 11th day. A notification was made to the
          people of the three Han,~ saying :-" On a former day, your
          taxes were remitted for a period of ten years, which have no\\~
          come to an end. In addition to this, all forced labour is
          remitted for a period of ten years to you who accepted our rule,
          and also to your children and grandchildren who accompanied
          you in the first year."
             11th day. Michichi, Kamitsukenu no Kimi, of Lower
          Daikin rank, died.
             16th day. The province of Ise sent tribute of a white owl.
             20th day. The Envoys sent to Tanegashima presented a
          map of that island. This country is more than 5000 ri distant
          from the capital, and lies in the middle of the sea south of
          Tsukushi. The inhabitants cut off their hair and wear garments
          of grass. Rice is always abundant. With one sowing, there
          are two harvests. The products of the island are Cape jasmine
          and bulrushes.:~ There are also numerous marine products of
          different kinds.
XXIX. 34.    On this day, Va-phil took his departure for his own country.
             9th month, 3rd day. The Envoys sent to Karyn and Silla
          arrived together and paid their respects to the Emperor.
             5th day. The province of Suw5 presented a red tortoise,
          w'hich was let loose in the pond of the Palace of Shima.
             9th day. A decree was issued, as follows :-" Let all
          Houses in which a senior member has not yet been fixed, each
          decide upon a senior member and report to the controlling
          department." 4
             14th day. An entertainment was given to the men of
          Tanegashima on the river bank west of the Temple of Asuka.
          Various kinds of music were performed.
           1   Ohoharahi.         2 The Coreans settled in Japan.   3   For matting.
           4   i.e. the Jibusho; in Japanese, wosa11tUrU tsukasa.
                              TEMMU.                                 353
    16th day. A comet appeared.
   17th day. The planet Mars entered the Moon.
   Winter, loth month, 1st day. There was an eclipse of the sun.
   18th day. There was an earthquake.
   20th day. Silla sent !{im Chhyung-phyong, an II-kil-son 1 of
Sa-ti1k, and Kim Il-sye, of the rank of Te-nama, to bring
tribute, Vtrhich consisted of such things as gold, silver, copper,
iron, brocade, thin silk, deer skins and fine cloth-a certain
quantity of each. Separately they brought presents for the
Etnperor, the Empress-consort, and for the senior Prince of
such things as gold, silver, flags of haze 2-brocade and skins, a
certain quantity of each.
   25th day. The Emperor issued a decree as follows :-" Let XXIX. 35.
all, from those of Daisen rank down to Shaken, each declare
their vie\vs."
   In this month the Emperor intended to hunt on the plain of
Hirose. A temporary palace had been constructed, and his
baggage made ready, but in the end the Imperial car did not
proceed thither. Only those from the rank of Princes of the
 Blood down to the Ministers all stayed at Karunoichi and
inspected the equipage and the saddle-horses. The Daibu
from the rank of Shokin upwards all sat in order under a tree,
while those of the rank of Daisen and under mounted on
horseback themselves and passed together along the highway
from south to north.
   Silla Envoys came and announced the death of the king
of that country.
   11th month, 2nd day. There was an earthquake.
   12th month, loth day. Kobito, Kahabe no Omi, of Lower
Shukin rank, was sent to Tsukushi to entertain Chhyung-
ph~yong, the Silla guest.
   29th day. Kanuchi, Tanaka no Omi, Saru, Kakimoto no
Omi, Kuniwoshi, Tanabe no Muraji, Maro, Takamuku no
Omi, Mabito, Ahata no Omi, Maro, Mononobe no ~furaji,
Ohoshima, Nakatomi no Muraji, Karainu, Sane no Muraji, and
Chitoko, Funli no Atahe, ten 3 persons in all, received the rank
of Lower Shukin.
       1 Narne of rank.
       2 The reference is to the rosy colour of the morning hazes.
      :\ There are really only nine.
              354                               NIHONGI.

XXIX. 36.        On this day, Nukamushi, Toneri no Miyakko, and Chitoko,
              Fumi no Atahe, were granted the title of M uraji.
A.H.   682.      11th year, Spring, 1st month, 9th day. Nukamushi; Toneri no
              Miyakko, of Daisen rank, was given the rank of Lower Shokin.
                 11th day.      Kim Chhyung-phyong was entertained in
              Tsukushi.
                 18th day. The Lady Higami 2 died within the Palace.
                 19th day. There was an earthquake.
                ,27th day. The Lady Higami was buried at Akaho.
                 2nd month, 12th day. Kim Chhyung-phyong returned to
              his own country.
                 In this month, Nukamushi, Toneri no Miyakko, of Lower
              Sh6kin rank, died. In view of his services in the year Midzu-
              noye Saru, he received the posthunlous rank of Upper Daikin.
                 3rd month, 1st day. Prince Mino, of Sh6shi rank, the
              Daibu of the Household Department and others were sent to
              Nihiki 3 to examine the conformation of the gran nd. Itwas
              accordingly resolved to have the capital there.
                 2nd day. Twenty-two Yemishi of the province of Michinoku
              were granted dignities.
                 7th day. There was an earthquake.
                 13th day. By command of the Emperor, Ihashiki, Sakahibe
              no Muraji, invented afresh new characters-one book in forty·
              four volumes. 4
                 16th day. The Errlperor visited Nihiki.
                 28th day. The Emperor issued a decree forbidding hence-
              forward all from the Princes of the Blood down to the public
              functionaries to wear caps of rank, aprons, lined garments, & and

                 1 A curious personal name.      It nleans bran-nlagg-ot.       Many of the
              personal nalnes are by no ll1eans complinlentary, e.g. Saru, or monkey;
              !(ara·inu, or Carean dog; Shikowo, or ugly inan. These are obviously ,vhat
              we should call nicknalnes.
                2 One of the Elnperor's consorts.

                3 N ihiki means new castle.

                4 The" Shiki" says that this book ,vas still preserved in the Imperial Library,

              and that the letters were very like Sanskrit characters. If this was an
              attempt to introduce an alphabetic script into Japan, nothing came of it.
              For information respecting ancient forms of writing in Japan, Hirata's
              " Hifumiden " may be consulted.
                ~ The interlinear Kana l1as hira obi, i.e. broad girdles. Hahaki are
              leggings.
                                TEM!\IU.                              355
habaki, and also forbidding the stewards and U neme of the
Palace to wear shoulder-straps or scarfs. l
   On this day, a decree was addressed to all from the Princes
of the Blood down to the Ministers who had been granted
sustenance-fiefs, discontinuing all such fiefs, and directing that xx IX. 37
they should be returned to the State.
   In this month, Mate, Rase no Muraji, died. 2 For his services
in the year lVlidzunoye Saru he was granted the posthumous
rank of Upper Daikin.
   Summer, 4th month, 9th day. Worship was paid to the
Deities of Hirose and Tatsuta.
    21st day. Shima, Tajihi no Mabito, Viceroy of Tsukushi,
and others, sent tribute of a large berl.
    22nd day. I taka, Kina, and others, Yemishi of Koshi,
requested 7000 families of captives, in order to constitute a
district. Their request was granted.:l
    23rd day. The Emperor made a decree, saying :-" Hence-
forth all persons whatsoever, men or women, must tie up their
hair. This is to be completed not later than the 30th day of
the 12th month. But for the date of tying up the hair, let a
 further Imperial notification be awaited." It was from this
 time that the practice began of women riding on horseback like
 men. 4
    5th nlonth, 12th day. The \~anlato no l\ya no Atahe \vere
 granted the title of Muraji.
    16th day. The Chief Envoy to !{oryo, Hirotari, Saheki no
 Muraji, and the Junior Envoy, Mara, \Voharida no Omi,
 reported to the Palace the results of their mission.
    27th day. The Yamato no Aya no Atahe, male and female,
 all presented themselves. They were rejoiced at the grant of
 a title, and paid their respects to the Emperor.
    6th month, 1st day. The I(ing of Koryo sent Cho Yu-k\ve, Nu

   1 Hire. S0111ething like a Inantilla, worn on the head.
  ::lIn the older editions a long passage COlnes in here which belongs
properly to the fourteenth year of the reign.
   3 There is frequent 111ention of these "captives" in connection with Aino

affairs. I t is not clear who they \vere. A Japanese authority states that
they \vere subjects of the Cro\vn ,vho ",'ere captured and enslaved by the
savag-es.
   " That is to say, astride.
         J26                             NIHONGI.

          Mo..chal and Te-ko-myo-ka, of the Lower Division, with tribute
          of the products of the country. Accordingly, Silla sent Kim Syok-
          kwi, of Te-nama rank, to escort the Koryo Envoys to Tsukushi.
XXIX. 38     6th day. Men and women began to tie up their hair. They
         accordingly wore caps of varnished gauze. 1
             12th day. Prince Yeguri, of the 5th rank, died.
            Autun1n, 7th month, 3rd day. Hayato came in numbers
         with tribute of the productions of their country. On this day,
         the Hayato of Ohosumi and the Hayato of Ata 2 wrestled in
         the Court. The Ohosumi Hayato had the victory.
            9th day. Mara, Kashihade no Omi, of middle Shokin rank,
         took ill. His Highness 3 the Imperial Prince Kusakabe and
         the Imperial Prince Takechi were sent to make kind inquiry
         as to his illness.
            11th day. Worship was paid to the Deities of Hirose and
         Tatsuta.
            17th day. There was an earthquake.
            18th day. Mara, Kashihade no Omi, died. The Emperor
         was shocked, and lamented greatly.
            21st day. For his services in the year Midzunoye Saru,
         Maro no Omi 4 was granted the posthumous rank of Daishi
         and presents were given. The Empress-consort also bestowed
         gifts, which moreover were similar to those granted by the
         government.
            25th day. Presents of various values \vere given to men ot
         Tane,5 of Yaku and of Amami. 5
            27th day. The Hayato were entertained west of the Asuka
         Temple. Music of various kinds was performed, and presents
         given them varying in value in the case of each. The Buddhist
         priests and laity all came to look on.
            On this day it was reported from the provinces both of
         Shinano and Kibi that hoar-frost had fallen, moreover that
         o\ving to storms the five grains had not formed.

           1 Gauze hats were in use in China under the Tang and Ming dynasties.
        They are said to have been first worn by Wu Ti, of the Liang dynasty.
        Probably the statelnent in the text applies only to men and to officials.
          2 A district of Satsuma.                              3 Mikoto.

          4 He was properly Maro, Kashihade no Omi.         But the personal name is
        sometimes joined to the title in this way.
          e Or Tanegashillla. 6 All these are islands off the south coast of Kiushiu.
                                 TEMMU.                                357
   8th month, 1st day. All from the Princes of the Blood
down to the Ministers were each 1 made to bring forward
matters suitable for fralning regulations.
   3rd day. The Koryo guests were entertained in Tsukushi.
   On this evening at twilight a great star passed from the
East to the \\1 est. 2
   5th day. Laws were drawn up. There was a great rain-
bow within the Palace.
   11th day. A thing appeared in shape like a Buddhist bap-
tismal flag, and of a flame colour. It floated through the void
towards the north and was seen by all the provinces. Some
said that it sank into the Sea of Koshi. On this day a white
vapour arose on the Eastern Ivlountain, four fathoms in size.
   12th day. There was a great earthquake.                      XXIX. 39.
   -th 3 day. The Vicero~y of Tsukushi reported that there
was a sparrow with three legs.
   17th day. There was another earthquake. On this day
there was a rainbow at dawn right in the middle of the sky
and opposite to the sun.
   22nd day. The Ell1peror issued an edict (prescribing) the
character of ceremonies and 4 language.
   He decreed further, saying :-" Let the lineage and char-
acter of all candidates for office be always inquired into
before a selection is made. None whose lineage is insufficient
are eligible for appointment, even although their character,
conduct and capacity may be unexceptionable."
   28th day. On account of the illness of the Imperial Princess
Hidaka 5 [otherwise called the Imperial Princess Nihiya], an
Imperial command was given for the pardon of 190 persons of
both sexes who were guilty of capital or lesser crimes.
   29th day. More than 140 persons renounced the world in the
Great Temple of the Great Palace.
   9th month, 2nd da)r. By Imperial con1mand ceremonial
kneeling and crawling were both abolished from this time for-

  1 Referring probably to the division of labour mentioned above, XXIX. 30.
  2 A falling star is no doubt meant. The" Tsiisho" editor talks of the
planet Venus, which cannot be right.
  3 The date given here by the cyclical characters is an impossible one.

  4 Or of the language to be used on occasions of cerclllony.

  & Afterwards Gcnsho Tcnno.
         J26                           NIl-IONGI.

            ward, and the ceremonial custom of standing of the Naniha
            Court 1 was again practised.
               11th day. At mid-day, several hundreds of cranes appeared
            in the quarter of the Great Palace, and soared aloft in the void.
            After two hours they all dispersed.
              Winter, loth month, 8th day. A great revel \vas held.
              11th month, 16th day. The Emperor made a decree, say-
XXIX 40. ing :-" Hear this, all ye Princes of the Blood, Princes and
            Ministers, as well as ye common people! In regard to trials for
           offences against the law, whether within the Palace or in the
            Court, let examination be made at the place where the offence
            has been committed as soon as seen or heard of, and let there
           be no concealment. In the case of grave ~rimes, let those
           which should be referred to a superior be so referred, and
           when arrest is proper let the offender be seized. If any resist
           and are not arrested, raise the soldiers of the place and arrest
           them. To those judged deserving of flogging there may be
           administered not more than a hundred blows, to be deter-
           mined according to a scale. Moreover, when the facts of a crime
           are undeniable and the accused falsely states that he is innocent,
           and does not admit the justice of the charge, but disputes with
           the prosecuto~, let his original offence be superadded to this."
              12th month, 3rd day. A decree was issued as follows:-
           " Let the people of every' House 2 each determine who shall be
           the Senior member of the House, and make report accordingly.
           Moreover, in cases where there are numerous members of the
           same House, let them divide and each part determine WIlO shall
           be its own Senior member, all reporting at the same tinle to the
           proper officials, who shall thereupon weigh the facts and deal
           with the matter. Such official decisions must be accepted.
           And let no one for trifling reasons hastily include in his House
           persons who do not belong to it." 3
A.D. 68 3.    12th year, Spring, 1St month, 2nd day. The functionaries
           paid their respects at Court.

           1 Kotoku Tenno. The Annals of the Thang dynasty state that it was the
        custom in Japan for suitors to advance crawling. Standing was the Thang
        custOlTI.
          2 The Uji or noble families are lneant.
          3 "Such as relations by the luother's side, or by fnarriage, or distant
        relation~."-"Shiikai,"
                                  'rE~ll\IU.                              359
   The Viceroy ofTsukushi, Shima, Tajihi no Mabito, and others
presented tribute of a three-legged sparrow.
   All from the Princes of the Blood down to the Ministers were
invited in front of the Great Hall of Audience and a banquet
given them. On this occasion the three-legged sparrow \vas
shown to the Ministers.
   18th day. The Emperor issued a decree, saying :-" This is
the ordinance of Us, the Emperor Yamato neko, who rule, as a
God Incarnate, the great eight regions. Hear it, all ye governors
of provinces, Kuni no lVliyakko, governors of districts and common
people! Ever since We first rose to the vast dignity, there have
been auspicious signs from Heaven, not one or two only, but
many. Now We learn by tradition that auspicious signs fr0l11
Heaven come as a response when the principles of administering
the Government are in harmony with the laws of Heaven. That
they should appear repeatedly every year in this Our'reign is, on XXIX. 4 1
the one hand, matter for awe, and on the other, matter for rejoic-
ing. Therefore the Princes of the Blood, the Princes, with the
Ministers and functionaries, as well as the people of the Empire,
join with Us in our joy." Accordingly presents ,,,ere made to all
from the rank of Shuken upwards, each according to his
rank, and all crimes were pardoned from capital offences down-
wards. Moreover all forced labour was remitted to the common
people.
   On this day there was a performance in the Court of the
Woharida dance and of the music of the three countries of
Koryo, Pekche and Silla.
   2nd month, 1st day. The Imperial Prince Ohotsu for the
first time attended to matters of State.
   3rd month, 2nd day. On the occasion of making appoint-
ments to the offices of Suju, Sudzu, and Risshi,l the Emperor
gave comnland, saying :-" Let those \vho have general con-
trol over the priests and nUllS act according to the law," etc.,
etc.
   19th day. The Envoys sent to Tane ~ returned.
   Summer, 4th month, 15th day. The Emperor made a decree,
  1 The fornler t\VO offices were instituted in the reign of Suiko. See above,
Vol. I I. 153. The latter, \\'hich Hepburn translate~" doctor uf laws," was
now created for the first tilne,
  2 Tanegashima.
         J26                              NIHONGI.

             saying :-" Henceforth copper coins must be used, and not
             silver coins." 1
                18th day. A decree was issued, saying :-" Let the use at
             silver be not discontinued."
                21st day. \¥orship was paid to the Deities of Hirose and
             Tatsuta.
                6th month, 3rd day. Umakuta, Ohotomo no Muraji, died.
            The Emperor was much shocked, and sent Prince Hatsuse
            on a visit of condolence. The Emperor manifested a loving
            recognition of his zeal during the year Midzunoye Saru and
            of the services of his ancestors at all times, and granted
            him the posthumous title of Daishi, and burial with beat of
            drum and blowing of horns. 2
                6th day. Prince Takazaka, of the 3rd rank, died.
                Autumn, 7th month, 4th day. The Emperor went to the
            house of the Princess Kagami-hime and made kind inquiry as
XXIX. 4 2 • to her illness.
                5th day. Princess Kagami-hime died.
                In this summer priests and nuns were for the first time in-
            vited to the Palace for a "retreat." Accordingly thirty persons
            of pure conduct were selected, who renounced the world.
                15th day. Prayer was made for rain.
                18th day. The Emperor made a tour in the capital.
                20th day. Worship \vas paid to the Deities of Hirose and
            Tatsuta.
                From this month a drought began which lasted till the eighth
            month. A Buddhist priest of Pekche named Duzo 3 prayed for
            rain and obtained it.
               8th month, 5th day. A general amnesty was ordered
            throughout the Empire.
               \Vofukehi, Ohotomo no Muraji, died. For his services in the
           1 Silver coins are mentioned in the reign of Kenzo Tenno, A.D. 486.      But
        see note to this passage. Vol. I. p. 391. Copper coins were first made in
        Japan in the reign of Gemmei Tenno, in the first year (A.D. 708) of the
        period Wad6. The coins referred to in the text were therefore probably
        Chinese or Corean. Their use was exceptional at this period, the ordinary
        luediuln of exchange being hempen cloth or other textiles.
          2 Officials of the third rank \vere allowed at their funeral one hearse, forty

        drums, twenty great horns, forty little horns, 200 flags, one metal gong, and
        one hand-bell, with lalnentation for one day.
          3 rrobably a priest of the Temple called Kudaradera.
                               TEi\IMU.                               J26

year Midzunoye Saru, he was granted the posthumous rank of
Middle Daikin.
  9th month, 2nd day. There was a great storm.
  23rd day. The title of Muraji was granted to thirty.eight
Houses, viz. Yamato no Atahe, Kurikulna no Obito, Motori I
no Miyakko, Yatabe no Miyakko, Fujiharabe no Miyakko,
Osakabe no Miyakko, Saigusabe no Miyakko, Ofuchi Kahachi XX1X·43·
no Atahe, Kahachi no Aya no Atahe, Mononobe no Obito,
Yamashiro no Atahe, Katsuraki no Atahe, Tonohatori no
Miyakko, Kadobe no Atahe, Nishikori no Miyakko, Katsura no
Miyakko, Tottori no Miyakko, Kume no Toneri no Miyakko,
Hinokuma no Toneri no Miyakko, Ohokoma no Miyakko,
Hada no Miyakko, Kahase no Toneri no Miyakko, Yamato no
Mumakahi no Miyakko, Kahachi no I\1umakahi no lVIiyakko,
Kibumi no Miyakko, Komotsume no Miyakko, Magari Hako-
dzukuri no ~1iyakko, Isonokamibe no Miyakko, Takara Hi-
matsuri no Miyakko, Hasetsukabe no Miyakko, Anahobe no
Miyakko, Shiragabe no Miyakko, Oshinomi no Miyakko, Hat- XXIX. 44.
sukase no Miyakko, Fumi no Obito, Wohatsuse no Miyakko,
Kudara no Miyakko and Katarahi no Miyakko.
   Winter, loth month, 5th day. The title of Muraji was
granted to fourteen houses, viz., Miyake no Kishi, Kusakabe
no Kishi, Hfiki no Miyakko, Fune no Fubito, Iki no Fubito,
Sarara no Mumakahi no Miyakko, Uno no Mumakahi no
Miyakko, Yoshino no Obito, Ki no Sakabito no Atahe, U neme
no Miyakko, Atogi no Fubito, Takechi no Agatanushi, Shiki
no Agatanushi and Kagami-dzukuri no Miyakko. 2
   13th day. The Emperor went a-hunting to Kurahashi.
   11th month, 4th day. An Imperial command was given to
all the provinces to engage in military training.
   13th day. Silla sent Kim Chu-san, of Sason rank, and Kim
 Chang-chi, of Te-nama rank, to offer tribute.
   12th month, 23rd day. The Emperor sent Prince Ise, of XXIX. 45
the fifth rank of Princes, Yakuni, Hata no Kimi, of Lower
 Daikin rank, Homuchi, Ohoshi no Omi, of Lower Shukin
rank, Ohoshima, Nakatomi.no ~furaji, of Lower Shukin rank,
  1 Or Mondori.
  2 Previous promotions in rank have been of individuals. In this case the
whole Uji (House) was rai~ed at once. This accounts for no personal nanles
being given.
         J26                             NIIIONGI.

           with Hangwan, clerks, and artizans, to make a tour through
           the Empire and determine the boundaries of the provinces.
           They were unable, however, to determine them all this year.
              17th day. The Emperor made a decree, saying :-" Let all
           civil and military officials, and all persons of rank 1 in the Home
           provinces, not fail to present themselves at Court in the four
           first months. 2 If owing to mortal disease they cannot attend,
           let the officials whose duty it is to do so prepare a full report
           and forward it to the judicial authorities."
              He further made a decree, saying :-" The Capital and
           Palace should not be in one place only. They must be con-
           structed in several places. We therefore wish first of all to
           1llake the Capital at Naniha. Let the public functionaries
           therefore each proceed thither, and apply for sites for houses."
 A.D. 684.    13th year, Spring, 1St month, 17th da)T. The title ofMuraji
           was granted to the two Houses of Mino no Agatanushi and
           Kurando no Kinunuhi no Miyakko.
              23rd day. The Emperor, taking his place in the Eastern
           Court with the Ministers in attendance, sent for men skilled
           in archery, with dwarfs and palace attendants, and made them
           shoot.
              2nd month, 24th day. Kim Chu-san was entertained in
           Tsukushi.
              28th day. The Emperor sent Prince Hirose of Jo-kwo-
           shi rank,3 and Yasunlaro, Ohotonlo no Muraji, of Middle
           Shokin rank, with Hang\van, clerks, professors of the In and
           Yo; and artizans to the Home provinces, to determine by
           divination a site suitable for the 'capital.
              On this day Prince Mino, Tsukura, U neme no Omi, of Lower
           Sh6kin rank, and others were sent to Shinano to inspect the
           conformation of the ground, perhaps \\lith the object of having
           a capital there.
              3rd n10nth, 8th day. YUlni, Ube no Atahe, a man of
           Yoshino, sent tribute of a vvhite camellia.
XXIX. 46.     9th day. The Emperor made a visit to the capital, and
           decided on the site for a palace.
              23rd day. Kim Chu-san returned to his own country.
             1  Possessed of one of the grades of rank ll1entioned above, p. 28 I.
             ~  Of each quarter.
             ;s 'This rank \vas not instituted until later. See below, XXIX. 53.
                                   TEl\ll\fU.                              J26

   Summer, 4th nlonth, 5th day. All persons with sentences
of not more than lesser banishment were pardoned.
   13th day. Worship was paid to the great Abstinence Deity
of Hirose and to the Wind-Gods of Tatsuta.
   20th day. Mara, Takamuku no Omi, of Lower Shokin rank,
was sent as Chief Envoy to Silla, and Tsuno no Omi, of Lower
Shusen rank, as Junior Envoy.
   Intercalary 4th month, 5th day. The Emperor made a
decree, saying :-" We have resolved to hold an inspection in
the ninth month of next year. We therefore prescribe the
conduct 1 and the state ~ of the public functionaries."
   A further edict was made, as follows :-" In a government,
military matters are the essential thing. All civil and military
officials should therefore sedulously practise the use of arms
and riding on horseback. Be careful to provide an adequate
supply of horses, weapons, and articles of personal costume.
Those who have horses shall be made cavalry soldiers, those
vvho have none shall be infantry soldiers. Both shall receive
training. Let no obstacle be thro\vn in the way" of their
assembling for this purpose. If any person disobeys this edict,
if he does not provide a horse and weapons, or if his costume
is defective, all such persons, from Princes of the I~lood down
to l\1inisters, shall be fined. Those from the rank of Daisen
down who deserve to be fined shall be fined: those who deserve
flogging shall be flogged. But if by diligent practice they
succeed in learning their duties, they shall have their punish-
ment diminished by two degrees, even in the case of those
guilty of capital crimes. Anyone, however, who purposel)"
offends in reliance on his own cleverness is not included among
those eligible for pardon."
   A further edict was made as follows :-" As to the clothing
of both men and women, it is left to the wearers' option
whether they have susotsuki 8 or not, and also ties 4 or tassels. XXIX. 47.

  1   Their place and 1110\'enlents on State occasions.
  ~ Costume, attendants, etc.
  3 A kind of sleeveless jacket \vith a broad band on the skirt.      See illus-
tration in "Sanzaidzuye," Book XXVI I I. p. 4.
  4 The ties were for holding the flaps of the garment together in front;

the tassels "'crc the sanl'~, only longer, and allo\\'cd to hang down by \vay of
Olnanlcnt.
          J26                             NIIIONGI.

           But on the occasion of (state) assemblies, those who \vear
           susotsuki should also have tassels. In the case of men, how-
           ever, those who have yeboshi 1 should wear them, and at the
           same time laced 2 trousers. Women of forty years of age or
           upwards are allowed to tie up their hair or not, and to ride
           astride or side-saddle, just as they please. A distinction is
           made in the case of practisers of magic, who are excepted
           from the rule for tying up the hair." a
              11th day. Prince Mino and his colleagues presented a map
          of the province of Shinano.
              16th day. A vegetarian feast was prepared within the
          Palace. A pardon was accordingly given to the Toneri who
          had been guilty of offences.
              24th day. The Buddhist priest Fukuyu of Asukadera was
          condemned and thrown into prison.
              29th day. f"'ukuyo committed suicide 'by cutting his throat.
              5th month, 14th day. The priests, nuns and laity who had
          emigrated from Pekche, men and women, altogether twenty-
          three persons, were all settled in the province of M usashi.
             28th day. Nanihamaro, Miwa no Hiketa no Kimi, was sent
          to Koryo as Chief Envoy, and Hitotari, Kuhabara no Muraji,
          as Junior Envoy.
             6th month, 4th day. Prayer was offered for rain.
XXIX. 48.    Autumn, 7th month, 4th day. The Emperor visited Hirose.
             9th day. Worship was paid to the Deities of Hirose and
          Tatsuta.
             23rd day. A comet appeared in the North-west, more than
          ten feet long.
             Winter, roth month, 1St day. The Emperor made a decree,
          saYlng:-
             " The hereditary titles of all the families 4 are again reformed,

           1  A kind of cap. Vide illustration in " Sansaidzuye," XXIX. 5.
           2  Gathered in at the bottoln with a lace, like Turkish trousers. No\v
         called nubakalna.
            a No doubt this exception \vas prolupted by the conservatism associated
         with religious practices, and of which the use of the fire-drill in Japan at
         the present day is a striking exanlple.
            4 Noble fanlilies are of course meant.    Here as elsewhere the word I
         translate title is ~1 or surnanle. The Japanese had no proper surnames
         at this tilue.
                                 TEM~IU.                                  J26

and eight titles of eight classes instituted. By this means the
multitudinous titles of the Empire are amalgamated. The first
is Mabito,l the second Ason,2 the third Sukune/ the fourth
Imiki,4 the fifth Michi no Shi,a the sixth Omi,6 the seventh
Muraji,7 and the eighth Inaki." 8
   On this day thirteen houses received the title of Mabito,
viz. Moriyama no Kimi, Michi no Kimi, Takahashi no
Kimi, Mikuni no Kimi, Tahema no Kimi, Ibaraki no Kimi,
Tajihi no Kimi, Wina no Kimi, Sakata no Kimi, Hata no
Kimi, Okinaga no Kimi, Sakabito no Kimi, and Yamaji no
 Kimi.
   3rd day. Prince Ise and his colleagues were sent to determine
the boundaries of the provinces.
   On this day, Tasuki, Agata no Inukahi no Muraji, was sent
to Tamna as Chief Envoy, and Kane, Kahabara no Muraji, as
Junior Envoy.
    14th day. At the hour of the boar (10 p.m.) there \vas a great
earthquake. Throughout the country men and women shrieked
aloud, and knew not East from West. ~Iountains fell down
 and rivers gushed forth; the official buildings of the provinces XXIX. 49·
and districts, the barns and houses of the co mmon people, the
temples, pagodas and shrines were destroyed in numbers \vhich
 surpass all estimate. I n consequence many of the people and
 of domestic animals were killed or injured. The hot springs of
 lyo were dried up at this time and ceased to flow. In the
 province of Tosa more than 500,000 shiro of cultivated land
 \vere swallowed up and became sea. 9 Old men said that
 never before had there been such an earthquake. On this

   1 True man, g-iven chiefly to persons of Itnperiallineage.

  ~ This is \vritten ¥JJ g!, and is derived by some from asa, morning, and
omi, Minister. I suspect that it is the Corean title ISiiJ'i.
  3 No satisfactory explanation of this title is given.   I t had fallen out of
use at this time, and \vas no\v revived.
  4 This title was specially given to imnligrants from Corea, and is said to
be for ima-ki or new-conler.
   6 Or Doshi, professor.                        6 Minister or vassal.
  '; The originallneaning is village-elder.
  R Usually \"ritten \vith characters \vhich mean rice-castle.      They \vere
perhaps originally the keepers of the public granaries.
  9 The line of the southern coast of Tosa is said to have been tnaterially
altered by this earthquake.
  VOL.   II                                                       B   b
         J26                             NIHONGI.

          night a rumbling noise like that of drums was heard in the
          East. Some said that the island of Idzu 1 had increased of
          itself on two sides, the north and west, to the extent of more
          than 300 rods, and that a new island had been formed. The
          noise like that of drums was the sound made by the gods in
          constructing this island.
              16th day. Presents were made to the Princes and Ministers.
             11th month, 1st day. The title of Ason was granted to
          fifty-t\vO houses,2 viz. Oho-miha no Kimi, Oho-Kasuga no Omi,
          Abe no Omi, Kose no Omi, Kashihade no Omi, Ki no Omi,
          Rata no Omi, Mononobe no Muraji, Heguri no Omi, Sazakibe
          no Omi, Nakatomi no Muraji, Ohoyake no Omi, Ahata no
          Omi, Ishikaha no Omi, Sakarawi no Omi, Uneme no Omi,
XXIX. 50. Tanaka no Omi, Woharida no Omi, Hodzumi no Omi, Yama-
          shiro no Omi, Kamo no Kimi, Wono no Omi, Kahahe no
          Omi, I wi no Omi, I(akimoto no ami, Karobe no Omi,
          Waka-zakurabe no ami, Kishida no Omi, Takamuko no
          Omi, Shishi-bito no Omi, Kurne no Omi, Inugami no Kimi,
          I(amidzukenu no Kimi, Tsunu no ami, Hoshikaha no Omi,
          Oho no Omi, Munagata no Kimi, Kuruma-mochi no Kimi,
          Aya no Kimi, Shimoji no Omi, Iga no Omi, Abe no Omi,
          Hayashi no ami, Hami no Omi, Shimodzukenu no Kimi,
          Sami no Kimi, Chi-mori no Omi, Ghana no Kimi, Saka-
          moto no ami, Ikeda no !{imi, Tamate no Omi, and Kasa no
          Omi.
              3rd day. The Governor of the province of Tosa reported
           that owing to a great tide which rose high, and an overflowing
           rush of sea-water, many of the ships used for conveying tribute
           had been sunk and lost. 3
              21st day. At dusk the seven stars drifted together to the
           North-east and sank;'
              23 rd day. At sunset a star fell in the quarter of the East as

           1 The volcanic island off the entrance to Vedo Bay, kno\vn to foreigners
         as Vries Island.
           2 A considerable step~   Ason ,vas the 2nd class, Olni the 6th, and Muraji
         the 7th.
           3 A tidal \vave is no doubt referred to, perhaps an accolllpanilnent of the

         ealthquake above described.
           4 The seven stars are the stars of the Northern Bushel, as the Chinese call

         Charles' Wain.
                                TEMMU.                                43°
large as a jar. l At the hour of the dog ~ the constellations were
,vholly disordered':; and stars fell like rain.                    XXIX. 51.
     During this nl0nth there was a star which shot up in the
zenith and proceeded along with the Pleiades until the end of
the month, when it disappeared.
     12th month, 2nd day. The title of Sukune was granted to
fifty houses, viz. Ohotomo no Muraji, Saheki no Muraji,
Adzumi no Muraji, Imbe no Muraji, Wohari no lvluraji, Kura
 no ?vI uraji, Nakatomi no Sakabito no Muraji, Hashi no Muraji,
 Harahibe no Muraji, Sakahibe no Muraji, Sakarawi no Tanabe
no Muraji, Ifube no Muraji, Kannaibe no Muraji, Osakabe no
 Muraji, Kusakabe no Muraji, Miyake no ~luraji, Kobe no
 Muraji, Tasuki no Muraji, Tajihi no Muraji, Yuki no Tajihi no
 Muraji, Nuribe 4 no Muraji, Oho-yuye no Muraji, Waka-yuye
 no Muraji, Yuge no Muraji, I{ami Hatori no Muraji, Nukatabe XXIX. 52.
 no Muraji, Tsumori no Muraji, Agata no Inukahi no !vI uraji,
 Waka-inukahi no Muraji, Tamanoya no Muraji, Nittabe no
 Muraji, Shidzuwori no Muraji, Hi no Muraji, Ofusama 5 no
 Muraji, Yamabe no Muraji, Y~atsume no Muraji, Sawi no
 1'1 uraji, Tsume-takumi 6 no Muraji, Ato no Muraji, Mamuta no
 Muraji, Tame no Muraji, Chihisakobe no I\luraji, Uji no
 Muraji, \Vi-tsukahi no Muraji, Ama no Inukahi no Muraji,
 Hashibito no Muraji, Usume no Muraji, Mino no Muraji,
 Moroahi no Omi, and Furu no Muraji.
     6th day. Wohi, Hashi no Sukune, and Hozen, Shirawi no
 Fubito, who had gone to the Land of Great Thang for
 study, and also Kobito Witsukahi no 1\1 uraji, and Tokuko,
 Tsukushi no Miyake no Muraji, who had been carried off to
 Great Thang during the Pekche campaign, arrived by way of XXIX. 53·
 Silla. Accordingly Silla sent Kim Mul-yu, of Te-nama rank,
 to escort Wohi and the others to Tsukushi.
     13th day. There was a general pardon to all criminals
 except those guilty of capital crimes.

   1 Described in the" Yengishiki" as holding t\VO to, the to being a little
less than the fourth part of an Imperial bushel.
  2 7 to 9 p.Hl.

   a A conlmentator says that this typified the disorder of the titles of the
nobility.
  4 Or U rushibe.                             ;) Or \\T ofuama.
  6 Hoof.\\·orkers.  Makers of inlitation tortoise-shell (?).
         43°                           NIHONGI.

            In this year it was notified to the four provinces of Iga, Ise,
         Mino, and Wohari, that for the future in years of payment of
           commuted taxes,l forced labour would be remitted, and in years
           of forced labour, the commuted taxes would be remitted.
              The lower district of Katsuraki in Yamato reported that there
           was a fowl with four legs. 2
              Moreover the district of Higami in the province of Tamba
           reported tllat there was a calf with twelve horns.
 A.D. 685.    14th year, Spring-, 1st month, 2nd day. The public function-
           aries paid their respects at Court.
              21st day. The styles of official ranks were reformed, and
           new grades added. There were two grades of Myo-i (bright-
           rank) and four grades of J6-'· (pure-rank), each grade being
           distinguished into Dai (great) and ](wo (broad), so as to form
           twelve grades in all. The above were for persons not below
           the rank of Princes.
              Next there were four grades of Sho-i (true or first rank), four
           grades of jiki.i (straight or direct rank), four grades of G01t-z"
           (diligent-rank), four grades of Mu-i (earnest-rank), four grades
           of Tsui-i (following-rank), and four grades of Skin-i (advancing-
           rank). Each grade was divided into Dai and Kwo, so that
           there were in all forty-eight grades. The above were the ranks
           of high officials.
XXIX 54.      On this day, His Highness the Imperial Prince Kusakabe was
           granted the rank of J6-kw6-ichi (pure-broad-first-rank), the
           Imperial Prince Ohotsu the rank of Jo-dai-ni (pure-great-
           second-rank), the Imperial Prince Takechi the rank of Jo-kwo-
           ni, the Imperial Prince Kahashima and the Imperial Prince
           Osakabe the rank of Jo-dai-san. The Princes of inferior
           rank and the high officials received steps in rank varying in
           each case.
              2nd month, 4tn day. Degrees of rank were granted to men
           of Great Thang, of Pekche, and of Koryo, I47 persons in all.
              3rdt month, 14th day. Kim Mul-yu was entertained in
           Tsukushi, and straightway took his departure from there.
            ! Not the land-tax of rice, but cloth and other things paid in lieu of
         service, etc.
            2 "Such monstrosities denoted that the Sovereign and his Ministers pay

         attention to the sayings of nuns and old \\'Onlen and show them excessive
         kindness."-" Shiikai."
                              TEMMU.                               43°
Accordingly seven men of Silla who had been cast away on
our coast ,,,ere delivered to Mul-yu and sent back.
   16th day. Shitanu, Rose no Ason, of Jiki.. dai-san rank, the
Mayor of the capital, died.
   27th day. Orders were sent to all the provinces that in
every house a Buddhist shrine should be provided, and an
image of Buddha with Buddhist scriptures placed there.
Worship was to be paid and offerings of food made at these
shrines. 1
    In this month there was a rain of ashes in the province of
Shinano. The herbs and trees all withered Up.2
    Summer, 4th month, 4th day. The Governor of the pro-
vince of Kii: reported that the hot springs of Muro had dried up
and ceased to flow.
    12th day. Worship was paid to the Deities of Hirose and
Tatsuta.
    17th day. Kim Chu-san of Silla took his departure.
    25th day. Priests and nuns were for the first time invited
 to come to the Palace for a " retreat." a
    5th month, 5th day. There was archery at the South Gate.
    The Emperor visited the Temple of Asuka, presented to the
 Buddha precious objects, and paid him reverence.
    19th day. Mabito, Ahada no Ason, of Jiki-dai.shi rank,
 offered to transfer his rank to his father, but by an Imperial
 order this was disallowed.
    On this day, Hiromaro, Tahema no Mabito, of Jiki-dai-san
 rank, died. For his services in the year Midzunoye Saru, he
 was granted the posthumous rank of Jiki-dai-ichi.
    26th day. Maro, Takamuku no Ason, Ushi-kahi, Tsunu no
 Ason, and their people arrived back from Silla. Along with XXIX. 55
 them arrived the student priests Kwanjo and Unkwan. The
 King of Silla sent presents of two horses, three dogs, two
 parrots, two magpies, and a variety of valuable objects.
    6th month, 20th day. Eleven houses were granted the
 title of Imiki, viz. Yamato no Muraji, Katsuraki no Muraji,

  1 These don1estic shrines (butsudan) are still to be seen in Japan.
  2 No doubt a fall of volcanic ashes is referred to, perhaps froID Asama-
yama. I have seen a forest at the foot of this mountain all ~ithered,
probably frOln the same cause.
  3 There has been already a notice to the same effect.
         37 0                            NIHONGI.

          Ofushi-kahachi no Muraji, Yamashiro no Muraji, Naniha no
          Mnraji, Ki no Sakabito no Muraji, Higashi Aya no Muraji,
          Nishi Aya no Mnraji, Hada no Muraji, Ohosumi no Atahe, and
          Fllmi no Muraji.
             Autumn, 7th month, 21St day. Worship was paid to the
          Deities of Hirose and Tatsuta.
             26th day. The colours of the Court costumes for persons of
          the rank of Myo-i down to that of Shin-i were now settled for
          the first time. All persons of the rank of Jo-i and above wore
          red, those of Shu-i rank deep purple, those of Jiki-i rank light
          purple, those of Gon-i rank dark green, those of Mu-i rank
          light green, those of Tsui-i rank deep grape-colour, and those
          of Shin-i rank light grape-colour.
             27th day. The Emperor made a decree, saying :-" All
          persons of rank I in the provinces of the To-san-du from Mino
          eastwards, and of the Tu-kai-do from Ise eastwards, are absolved
          from rendering forced labour."
             8th month, 12th day. The Emperor visited the Temple of
          Jodoji. 2
             13th day. The Emperor visited the Temple of Kahara,
          and gave alms of rice to the company of priests.
             20th day. The Envoys sent to Tamna returned.
             9th month, 9th day. The Emperor gave a banquet 10 the
          Court of the Audience Hall of the old Palace. 3
             On this day presents of cloth of various values were given
          to everyone from the Prince Imperial down to the Imperial
          Prince Osakabe.
XXIX. 56.    IIth day. Prince Miyatoko, Prince Hirose, Prince N aniha,
           Prince Takeda, and Prince Mino were sent to the capital and
          to the Home provinces, each to hold an examination of the
          arms of the militia. 4
             15th day. Ushikahi, Tsunu no Ason, of Jiki-kwo.shi rank,
           was appointed Commissioner for the Tokaido, Mushina,
           Ishikaha no Ason, of Jiki·kwo·shi rank, Commissioner for the
          To-san-do, Sukunamaro, Sami no Ason, of Jiki-kwo-shi rank,
          Commissioner for the Sanyo-do, Ahaji, Kose no Ason, of Jiki-
          kwo-shi rank, Commissioner for the San-in-do, Tomi, Michi
          no Mabito, of Jiki-kwo-san rank, Commissioner for the Nan-
           I Of one of the official ranks just mentioned.
           2 The sall1e as the Asukadera so often mentioned above.
           ~ Of Okamoto.                 4 Nimbu, a word usually applied to coolies.
                                TEMMU.                                43°
kat-do, and Hirotari, Saheki no Sukune, of Jiki-kwo-shi rank,
Commissioner for Tsukushi. Each took with him one
Hangwan and one secretary, and made a tour to inspect the
governors of provinces and of districts and the condition of
the people.
   On this day the Emperor made a decree, saying :-" Let all
singers, whether male or female, and all flute-players, transmit
their art to their descendants, and make them practise singing
and the flute." 1
   28th day. The Emperor took his place in the Great Hall of
Audience, summoned to him the Princes and Ministers before
the Hall, and made them gamble.
   On this day the Emperor made presents of the Imperial
upper garments and trousers to Prince Miyatoko, Prince
Naniha, Prince Takeda, Tomotari, Mikuni no Mabito, Oho-
torno, Agata no Inukahi no Sukune, Miyuki, Ohotomo no
Sukune, Ihashiki, Sakahibe no Sukune, Homuchi, Oho no
Ason, Tsukura, U neme no Ason, and Ohoshima, Fujihara no XXIX. 57.
Ason, ten persons in all.
   19th day. The Emperor gave presents of Polar bear-skins 2
and of skins of the mountain-goat to forty-eight Princes and
Ministers from the Prince Imperial downwards, of varying
value in each case.
   20th day. The Envoys sent to the Land of Koryo returned.
   24th day. On account of the Emperor being unwell,
Buddhist scriptures were read for three days in the Great
Temple of the Great Palace, and in the Temples of Kahara
and Asuka. Rice was accordingly given to these three
temples, in amounts varying in each case.
   27th day. The immigrants from Koryo received presents of
various amounts.
   Winter, loth month, 4th day. The Pekche priest Syang-hwi
was allowed a fief of thirty houses. This priest was a hundred
years old.
   8th day. Pop-chang, a priest of Pekche,3 and Gonju,

  1 Those employed about the Palace are no doubt nleant.
  2 See above, p. 257. The mountain-goat is probably the Kalno-shika, for
which see Dickins in I ntroduction to "Satow's Handbook," 2nd edit. p. [4 I].
  3 Perhaps this priest and the one named in the previous paragraph were

not Coreans, but only priests of the Temple of Kudara, the Japanese name
of pekche. Their names would in that case be J6-ki and H6.j6.
         37 2                            NII-TONGI.

          Masuda no Atahe, a lay member of the Buddhist Church/ were
          sent to Mino to make an infusion of \Vokera. 2 They were
          accordingly given presents of coarse silk, floss silk, and cloth.
             loth day. Tarise, Karobe no Ason, Nihinomi, Takada no
          Obito/ and Mara, Aredawo no Muraji, were sent to Shinano
          \vith instructions to prepare a temporary Palace. The in-
          tention probably was that the Emperor should visit the hot
          springs of Tsukama.
             12th day. Prince Hatsuse of Jo-dai-shi rank, Uma-kahi,
           Kose no Ason, of Jiki-kwo-shi rank, with Hangwan and inferior
          officers to the number of twenty persons in all, were appointed
          to carry out the works" in the Home provinces.
             17th day. Prince Ise and his colleagues went again to the
          Eastern provinces. They accordingly received presents of
          upper garments and trousers.
             In this month the" Kongo-hanya a Sutra" was expounded in
          the Palace.
             11th month, 2nd day. Ten thousand kin of store-iron were
XXIX. S8. sent to the prefecture 6 of Suwo. On the demand of the Vice-
          roy of Tsukushi the following store 7 articles were sent down to
          Tsukushi, viz. 100 hiki of coarse silk, 100 kin of raw silk, 300
          tan of cloth, 400 pieces of tax-cloth, 10,000 kin of iron, and
          2000 bundles of bamboos for making arrows.
             4th day. The Emperor gave orders to the provinces in all
          quarters, saying :-" All such things as great and small horns,
          drums, fifes, flags, crossbo\vs,8 and stone-throwing engines
          should not be kept in private houses; they should all be stored
          in the Government house of the district."

            1 Ubasoku, the Sanskrit Upasaka.       The title of Atahe seems to have
         been abolished by the ~dict given, XXIX. 48, and it is not found in the
         original text. The" Shiikai "editor has inserted it here, and something of
         the kind is evidently required.
           2 A medicinal plant, the Atractylis Ovata..   Hepburn.
            3 Another title abolished by the edict on XXIX. 48.

            4 The-construction of a tenlporary palace, says the " Shiikai."

           5 Sanskrit, "Vadjra Pradjiia."

           6 The term used means" the place of general control."        I t occurs here
         for the first time.
           7 From the Governlnent stores. The use of coin \vas still very restricted,
         and relnittances took such forms as this.
           8 Large crossbows are meant, \vhich it required several llleD to handle.
                                   TEMMU.                                    373
                                                                            43°
   6th day. The Emperor visited the park of Shira-nishiki.
   The priests Pop-chang and Gonju presented to the Emperor
an infusion of W okera. 1
   On this day the ceremony of "calling on the spirit" was
performed for the Emperor's sake. 2
   27th day. Silla sent Kim Chi-syang, of Pha-chin-son rank,
and Kim Kon-hun, of Te-ason rank, to request governance and
to bring tribute.
   12th month, 4th day. The frontier guards sent to Tsukushi
were tossed about in mid ocean, and all lost their clothing.
Accordingly 450 tan of cloth were sent to Tsukushi to make
clothing for them.
   loth day. There was an earthquake. It began from the
West.
   16th day. Alms of coarse silk, floss silk, and cloth were XXIX. 59.
given to the priests of the Great Temple in the Great Palace.
   19th day. The Empress-consort presented the Princes and
high officials, to the number of fifty-five persons, with Court
costume, one suit to each.
  Shucho/ 1st year, Spring, 1st month, 2nd day. The Em- A.D. 686.
peror took his place in the Great Hall of Audience and gave a
banquet to the Princes and High Officials.

  1  See above, XXIX. 57.
  2  When the Slln.. goddess sent down Ninigi no Mikoto to rule the lower
world, she gave him, according to the" Kiujiki" (I I. 2), ten auspicious
Heavenly treasures, viz. one mirror of the offing, one mirror of the shore,
one eight-span sword, one jewel of birth, one jewel of return from death,
one sufficing jewel, one jewel of the returning path, one dragon's fin, one bee's
fin, and one fin of various articles. The Heavenly ancestor then instructed
hinl, saying :-" In case of ailment, say to these ten treasures, ' Hl,fu, 1ni,
yo, itsu, 1nu, nana,ya, kokono, taY';' [or according to another version, ' Hi,
(u, nli, yo, i, mu, na, ya, ka, to '] (i.e. one, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine, ten), and shake them yura-yura (an onolnatopoetic word). If
thou dost so, the dead will come to life again." This was the origin of the
ceremony offuru (shaking).
   The interlinear Kana calls this ceremony mitama-furishiki (shakiJJg the
august jewels). The Chinese characters mean" invitation of the spirit." It
was perfornled with the object of renewing the Enlperor's vigour and
prolonging his life.
   3 Shucho means red-bird.         The" Nihongi " has no year-periods for the
early part of the reign of Telnmu, but some chronologists give Shujaku for
672 and Hakuho for 673-685.
         374                           NIHONGI.

             On this day the Emperor decreed, saying :-" We shall now
          propose conundrums 1 to the Princes and High Officials, and
          we promise prizes to those who give the right answers."
             U pan this the Imperial Prince Takechi gave the right
          answers to the questions and received a present of 3 suits of
          Imperial garments of hari-suri,2 2 pairs of brocade trousers,
          with 20 hiki of coarse silk" 50 kin of raw silk, 100 kin of floss
          silk, and roo tan of cloth. Prince Ise also gave right answers,
          and was presented with 3 suits of black Imperial garments, 2
          pairs of purple trousers, 7 hiki of coarse silk, 20 kin of raw
          silk, 40 kin of floss silk, and 40 tan of cloth.
             On this day Kudara no Nihiki, a man of the province of
          Settsu, presented to the Emperor a white agate.
             9th day. An invitation was given to the three higher eccle-
          siastics, the Risshi, 3 and also to the director and clerks of the
  .       Great Temple of the Great Palace, nine priests in all, and they
XXIX. 60. were entertained at a lay 4 banquet. Moreover alms were given
          them of coarse silk, floss silk, and cloth, varying in value in
          the case of each.
             loth day. The Princes and High Officials received a present
          of upper garments and trousers, one suit each.
             13th day. Men of talent, scholars, professors of Philosophy,S
          and physicians, more than twenty persons in all, were sum-
          moned to the Palace. Food was given them and presents
          made to them.
             14th day. At the hour of the cock 6 the Treasury Depart-
          n1ent at Naniha took fire and all the Palace was burnt. Some
          said that the fire broke out in the house of Kusuri, Ato no
           Muraji, and that it spread from there to the Palace. But the
          Arsenal offices \vere not burnt.
             16th day. The Emperor invited the Princes and High
          Officials to a banquet in the Great Audience Hall, and made

             1 Literally things with no end, i.e. \vithout head or tail-nonsensical

         questions. Here is a specilnen. "Why does a horse, after a rapid run,
         listen to the earth? Why does a dog, when he goes slo\vly, raise his
         ltg? "
            2 A dye.

            3 A rank in the Buddhist priesthood.

            4 Not confined to vegetarian dishes.

            a Of the Yin and Yang systenl of Chinese philosophy.          6 6 p.m.
                                 TEMMU.                                   375
                                                                         43°
them presents of coarse silk, floss silk, and cloth, varyIng
according to the rank of each.
   On this day conundrums were put to the Ministers, and
more presents of fine and coarse silk given to those \vho made
the right answers on the spot.
   17th day. A banquet was given in the hinder Palace. l
   18th day. There was a great revel at Court.
   On this day the Emperor took his place in front of the Im-
perial muro ~ building and made presents to performers, of
various values. He also gave presents of clothing to singers.
   19th day. There was an earthqual\e.
   In this month Prince Kahachi, of J6-k\v5-shi rank, Yasu-
maro, Ohotomo no Sukune, of Jiki-kwo-san rank, Ohoshima
Fujihara no Ason, of Jiki-dai-shi rank, Konoshiro, Sakahibe
no Sukune, of Jiki-kwo-shi rank, and Mushimaro, Hodzumi
no Ason, of Jiki-kwo-shi rank, were sent to Tsuknshi to
 entertain Kim Chi-syang, of Silla.
   2nd month, 4th day. The t~mperor took his place in the
Great Reception Hall and conferred the rank of Gon-i on six
 Ministers who attended him personally.
    sth day. The Emperor commanded that nine meritorious
governors of provinces should be selected and the rank of
 Gon-i conferred on them.
    3rd month, 6th day. Yakuni, Hata no Mabito, of Jiki-dai-
 san rank, holding the office of Daiben, took ill. On his behalf
 three men entered religion as priests.
    10th day. 5no\v.
    25 th day. Yakuni, Hata no Mabito, died. On account of
 his services in the year Midzunoye Saru, he was granted the
 posthumous rank of Jiki-dai-ichi.
    Summer, 4th month, 8th day. The rank ot Jiki-k\vo-shi XXIX. 61 .
 was bestowed on Kato, Kuhabara no Sukuri, the Emperor's
 body-physician. He was also granted the title of Muraji.
    13th day. For the entertainment of the Silla guests, the
 music of the Temple of Kahara was transported to Tsukushi.
 Accordingly, 5000 sheaves of rice, the private property of

  1 The Empress-consort's rOOITIS.

  ~ Muro,  Ii,  see Vol. I. p. 71. note. For a long tilne there has been no
mention of this kind of d\\"elling in the'" Nihong i ." Or perhaps (\1 itlluro is
simply the name of a particular buil~ing.
         37 6                            NIHONGI.

         the Empress..consort's Palace, were paid to the Temple of
         Kahara. 1
            19th day. The Silla tribute was brought up from Tsukushi.
         It consisted of more than 100 articles, including one good
         horse, one mule, two dogs, vessels of chased gold as well as
         gold and silver, rose..tinted brocades, silk gauze, tiger and
         leopard skins, and drugs. Moreover Chi-syang and Kon hun
         presented separately such things as gold and silver, rose-tinted
         brocades, silk gauze, vessels of gold, screens, saddle-skins, thin
         cloth stuffs, and drugs, of each more than sixty kinds. There
         were separate presents for the Empress-consort, the Prince
         Imperial, and the Princes of the Blood, a certain number of
         articles for each.
            27th day. The Imperial Princess Taki, the Princess Yama-
         shiro no hime, and the Lady Ishikaha were sent to the Shrine
         of Ise.
            5th month, 9th day. The Imperial Princess Taki and her
         companions returned from Ise.
            On this day Ok-in,2 a man of Pekche, the body-physician of
         the Emperor, took ill. When he was on the point of death,
         he was granted the rank of Gon-dai-ichi and a fief of 100
         houses.
            14th day. Ry Imperial command, a fief of 700 houses was
         granted to the Great Temple of the Great Palace, and taxes
         given it to the amount of 30,000 sheaves (of rice).
            17th day. Promotion in rank was granted to the officials of
         the Palace.
            24th day. The Emperor's body was ill at ease. Accord-
         ingly the" Sutra of Yakushi " 3 was expounded in the Temple of
XXIX.62. Kahara, and a " retreat" was held within the Palace.
            29th day. Kim Chi-syang and his colleagues were enter-
         tained in Tsukushi. Each having received presents of various
         amounts, they took their departure from Tsukushi.
            In this month, by Imperial command, the Ohotoneri of the
          Right and Left were sent to cleanse the Halls and Pagodas of
           lOne reading has fifty sheaves of, rice. The interlinear Kana has
         Kure-gaku, i.e. ll1usic of !(ure, the Japanese name for the province of Wu in
         China.
           2 The interlinear Kana has Wokuni.

          3 "Bhechadjya Radja," i.e. the Inedical King.     Eitel.
                              TEMl\lU.
                              TEMMU.                               377
                                                                  43°
the Temples. Accordingly a general pardon throughout the
Empire was proclaimed, and the prisons were empty.
   6th month, 1st day. Kachimaro, Tsukinloto no Sukuri, was
granted the title of Muraji, raised to the rank of Gon-dai-ichi,
and given a fief of twenty houses.
   2nd day. Official rank was besto\ved on thirty-four persons,
including architects, professors of philosophy, body-physicians
of the Emperor, students of Great 1""hang, and one or t\VQ
officials.
   7th day. A selection was made of twenty-eight functionaries
who had rendered good service, and they were promoted in
rank.
   loth day.     It was ascertained by divination that the
Emperor's disease was owing to a curse from the Kusa-nagi
sword. l The same day it was sent to the shrine of Atsuta, in
W ohari, and deposited there.
   12th day. Prayer \vas made for rain.
    16th day. Prince Ise and a number of officials were sent to
the Temple of Asuka, to communicate to the priests the Em-
peror's commands, as follo\\'s :-" Of late Our body is ill at
ease, and \Ve request that the dread power of the Three
 Precious Things may be invoked, in order to obtain repose for
 Our person. Let the S6jo, the S6dzu, and the general body
of priests therefore put up prayers." Offerings of rare and
valuable things were accordingly made to the Three Precious
Things. On this day the three higher ecclesiastics, with the
 Risshi and the abbots 2 of the four temples, the directors, and
 the priests of professorial rank then in residence, received
each alms of one suit of Imperial garments and one Imperial
coverlet.
    19th day. Public functionaries were sent to the Temple of XXIX. 63-
 Kahara to exhibit lanterns and make offerings of food. So
there was a great vegetarian feast, and repentance ,vas made
 for sin.

  1 See above, VoL I_ p. 20;, \T 01. I I. p. 290.
  2 The Sinico-japanese is Osho, the equivalent of the Sanskrit Upashaya
Osha is the polite \vord for a priest in Japan at the present day. The
four temples were doubtless the great temples which remained under
official administration after the disendowment measure described above,
XXIX. 27.
43°                            NIHONGI.

   20th day. The priests Hojin and Gisho were granted fiefs
of thirty houses each, to support them in their old age.
   22nd day.l The kitchen office 2 at Nabari was burnt.
   Autumn, 7th month, 2nd day. The Emperor commanded
that men should again wear leggings, and that women should
let down their hair on their backs, as was formerly the
practice.
   On this day the Soja and S6dzu came into the Palace, and
performed a penitential service.
   3rd day. The Emperor commanded the provinces to
perform the ceremony of Oho-barahi. 3
   4th day. Half the commuted taxes were remitted through-
out the Empire, and all forced labour was dispensed with.
   5th day. Offerings were made to Kuni-gakari no Kami,4
who dwells in the province of Kii, to the four shrines of Asuka,
and to the Great God of Sumiyoshi.
   8th day. One hundred priests were invited into the Palace,
and made to read the Kon-kwo-myo Sutra.
   loth day. There was lightning in the south, with a great
clap of thunder. The buildings used by the Department of
the Interior, for the storage of tax-cloth, met with destruction
from Heaven. Some said that the fire broke out in the
Palace of the Imperial Prince Osakabe, and that it spread
to the Department of the Interior.
   15th day. The Elnperor gave orders that ~11 matters of the
Empire, without distinction of great and small, should be
referred to the Empress-consort and the Prince Imperial.
   On this day a general amnesty was granted.
   16th day. Worship was paid to the Deities of Hirose and
Tatsnta.
   19th day. An Imperial edict was issued, as follows :-" Let
all common people throughout the Empire who, owing to
poverty, have contracted debts in rice or in valuables, whether
to the State or to private persons, on or before the 30th day of

  1  Son1ething is \vrong with the dates here.
  2  An agency for the supply of victuals for the Ilnperial table. These
offices seem to have taken the place of some of the Be of more ancient
times. The "Yengishiki" mentions such offices in Idzumi, Kil, Ahaji,
Afumi, and Wakasa.
  3 Great purification.        .. Said by the" Shiki " to be a Corean deity.
                               TE~IMU.
                              TEMMU.                             43°
                                                                  379
the 12th month of the year I~inoto Tori (685) be absolved
from payment."
   2znd day. The style of the year was changed to Shuch6,
1st year. [The characters *: ,I are read aka-1nitor£, red-
august-bird.] The Palace was accordingly entitled the Palace XXIX.6.q.
of Asuka 1 no Kiyomibara.
   28th day. Seventy persons of pure conduct 2 were selected
to retire from the world. A feast of vpgetable food was provided
in the Palace in front of the Emperor's muro 3 residence.
   In this IIlonth the Princes and Ministers made images of
Rwannan," for the Emperor's sake. Accordingly the Kwan-
ze-on Sutra 5 was expounded in the Great Temple of the
Great Palace.
   8th month, 1st day. For the sake of the Emperor, eighty
priests were received into religion-
   2nd day. Priests and nuns, to the number of 100 in all,
entered religion. Accordingly, 100 Bosatsll 6 were set up
within the Palace, and 200 volumes of the Kwannon Sutra
read.
   9th day. On account of the illness of the Emperor, prayer
was made to the (Shintu) Gods of Heaven and Earth.
   13 th day. Ihakatsu, Hada no Imiki, was sent to make
offerings to the Great God of Tosa.
   On this day the Prince Imperial, the Imperial Prince
Ohotsu, and the Imperial Prince Takechi had each 400 houses
added to their fiefs. The Imperial Princes Kahashima and
Osakabe had each additions of 100 houses.
  15th day. The Imperial Princes Shiki and Shigi received
additions of 200 houses each.
  The Temples of Hinokuma, Karu, and Ohokubo were each
granted fiefs of 100 houses, limited to a term of thirty years.

    1 Asuka is written \vith t\VO Chinese characters which mean "flying-
bird."
   2 Who practised the precepts of 13uddhisln.

   :; See above, XXXIX. 60.
  4 In Sanskrit, Avalokites'vara.  Vide Eitel.
  n Part of the ,. Hokkekyo;' or "Saddhanna Pundarika Sutra," called
Fumonbon. Kwan-ze-on is another form of the word K\vannon.
   6 Bodhisattva.  The images of Kwannon nlade by the Princes and
Ministers are probably meant.
         ~80
         ,)                        NII-IONGI.

             23rd day. A fief of 200 houses was granted to the Temple
          of Kose.
             9th month, 4th day. All, from the Princes of the Blood
          down to the Ministers, assembled in the Temple of Kahara,
          and put up vows for the Emperor's illness, etc., etc.
             9th day. The Emperor's disease having shown no sign of
          abatement, he died in the principal Palace.
             11th day. Lament was begun for him, and a temporary
          burial Palace erected in the South Court.
             24th day. The Emperor was tenlporarily interred in the
          South Court and mourning began.
             At this time the Imperial Prince Ohotsu conspired against
XXIX. 65. the Prince Imperial.
             27th day. At dawn, all the priests and nuns having made
          lament in the Court of Temporary Interment, retired.
             On this day, for the first time, offerings were made at the
          tomt) and eulogies pronounced.
             First of all, Aragama, Ohomi no Sukune, pronounced a
          eulogy regarding the Imperial Princes; next, Prince Ise, of
          Jo-dai-shi rank, pronounced a eulogy regarding the other
          Princes; next, Ohotomo, Agata no Mukahi no Sukune, of
          Jiki-dai-san rank, pronounced a eulogy regarding the
          officials of the Household generally; next, Prince Kahachi, of
          Jo-kwo-shi rank, pronounced a eulogy regarding the Oho-
          toneri of the right and left; next, Kunimi, Tahema no Mabito,
          of Jiki-dai·san rank, pronounced a eulogy regarding the
          Guards of the right and left; next, Tsukura, U neme no Ason,
          of Jiki-dai-shi rank, pronounced a eulogy regarding the lady
          officials of the Palace; and next, Mabito, Ki no Ason, of
          Jiki-kwo·shi rank, pronounced a eulogy regarding the Stewards
          of the Palace.
             28th day. All the priests and nuns again made lament in
          the Court of Temporary Interment.
             On this day, Miaruji, Fuse no Ason, of Jiki-dai-shi rank,
          pronounced a eulogy regarding the Council of State; next,
          Maro, Isonokami no Ason, of Jiki-kwo-san rank, pro-
          nounced a eulogy regarding the judicial officers; next,
          Takechi-maro, Oho-miwa no Ason, of Jiki-dai-shi rank, pro-
          nounced a eulogy regarding the administrative officials;
          next, Yasumaro, Ohotomo no Sukune, of Jiki-kwu-san rank,
                      TEM~lU.                      3 81
pronounced a eulogy regarding the Treasury; and next,
Ohoshima, Fujihara no Ason, of Jiki-dai-shi rank, pronounced
a eulogy regarding the war officials.
  29th day. The priests and nuns 3.gain raised lament.
   On this day, Mara, Abe no Kunu no Ason, of Jiki-kwo-shi
rank, pronounced a eulogy regarding the Board of Punish-
ments; next, Yumibari, Ki no Ason, of Jiki-kwu-shi rank,
pronounced a eulogy regarding the Department of the XXIX. 66.
Interior; next, Mushi-maro, Hodzumi no Ason, of Jiki-kwu-
shi rank, pronounced a eulogy regarding the Governors of
Provinces; next, the Ohosumi no Ata no Hayato, and the two
Muma-kahi-be no Miyakko of Yamato and Kahachi each
pronounced eulogies.
   30th day. The priests and nuns made lament.
   On this day, the Pekche prince Nyang-u pronounced a
eulogium on behalf of his father, Prince Chon-kwang. Next,
the Miyakko of the various provinces, as they came, each
pronounced his eulogy. There were also performances of all
manner of singing and dancing.




  VOL. II.                                   c c
                              BOOK XXX.

       THE EMPRESS TAKAMA NO HARA HIRO-NO NO HIME. 1


                            (JIT0 2     TENNO)

THE Empress Takama no hara hiro-no no hime's name as a
child was the Imperial Princess U no no Sarara. She was the
second daughter of the Emperor Ame-mikoto hirakasu wake. 3
Her mother's name was Wochi no Iratsume. [Also called
Minodzuko hime.] She was of reserved manners and a
liberal disposition. In the third year of the Empress Ame-toyo
takara ikashihi tarashi hime, she was united to the Emperor
Arne no Nunahara oki no Mabito as his consort. Although the
daughter of an Emperor, she loved courtesy and economy, and
was possessed of motherly virtues. In the first year of the
Emperor Ame-mikoto hirakasu wake, she gave birth to His
Highness the Imperial Prince Kusakabe in the palace of
Ohotsu. In the tenth month of the tenth year (of the same
reign) she followed the Shaman the Emperor Arne no
Nunahara oki no Mabito to Yoshino in order to avoid the sus-
picious dislike of the Court, as has been related in the history
of the Emperor Arne no Nunahara oki no Mabito. In the first
year of the reign of the Emperor Arne no Nunahara oki no
Mabito, summer, the sixth month, she followed the Emperor
when he took refuge in the Eastern provinces. She addressed
the troops and mingled with the throng, until at length they
together formed a plan by which several tens of thousands of
fearless men were separately ordered to take up their posts in
all the most defensible positions. In autumn, the seventh
month, the Mino generals acting in concert with the Yamato
heroes slew the Imperial Prince Ohotomo and sent his head to
 1   High-Heaven broad-plain princess.
 2   Jito nleans "holding suprelne contro!."     3   Tenchi Tennn.
                                 JITO.                               43°
be shown at the Fuha Palace. In the second year she was
raised to the rank of Empress-consort. The Empress-consort
from the beginning until now had assisted the Emperor in xxx. 2
pacifying the Empire. It constantly happened that in the con-
duct of business, her ready advice on Government matters was
of the greatest assistance. 1
    In the first year of Shucho, on the ninth day of the ninth
month, the Emperor Arne no N unahara oki no Mabito died.
The Empress-consort presided over the Court and exercised
control.
    Winter, loth month, 2nd day. The Imperial Prince Ohotsu's
treason was discovered and he was placed under arrest. There
were arrested at the same time W otokashi, Yakuchi no Ason, of
Jiki-kwo-shi rank, Hakatoko, Yuki no Muraji, of Lower Shu-
sen rank,2 and also the Ohotoneri Omi-marc, Nakatomi no
Ason, Tayasu, Kose no Ason, a Silla priest named Heng-sin, with
Tobari, Toki no Michi-dzukuri, and others, more than thirty
persons in all, who had been led astray by the Imperial Prince
Ohotsu.
    3rd day. Death was bestowed on the Imperial Prince xxx. 3.
Ohotsu in his house at Wosada. He was twenty-four years of
age. His consort, the Imperial Princess Yamanobe, hastened
thither with her hair dishevelled and her feet bare, and joined
him in death. All who witnessed sighed and sobbed.
    The Imperial Prince Ohotsu was the third child of the
Emperor Arne no Nunahara oki no Mabito. 3 Hi8 demeanour
was noble and his language refined. He was beloved by the
Emperor Arne mikoto hirakasu wake. When he gre\v to man-
hood he showed an eminent talent for learning, and was very
fond of writing. The practice of composing Chinese verses had
 its origin with Ohotsu.
    29th day. An Imperial decree was issued as follows :-" The
Imperial Prince Ohotsu has been guilty of treason and has led
astray officials and people, so that We, within the curtain,
had no alternative. 4 The Imperial Prince OhotSll has now
perished. His followers deserve the same sentence as the
 1 This sentence is borro\ved from a Chinese author.
 2 'fhis rank had been abolished some years before.
 3 Temmu Tenn6.

 4 The Empress is the speaker.    Hence the phrase, "Within the curtain."
        43°                             NIHONGI.

           Prince, but We pardon them all. Toki no Michi-dzukuri is
           however, banished to Idzu." It was further decreed, saying:
          - " We cannot bring ourselves to inflict punishment on the
           Silla priest Heng-sin, \vho was an accomplice in the Imperial
           Prince Ohotsu's treason. He is therefore exiled to the temple
           of the province of Hida."
              11th month, 16th day. The Imperial Princess Ohoku, who
           had been sent to attend at the shrine of Ise, returned to the
          capital.
             17th day. There was an earthquake.
             12th month, 19th day. On behalf of the Emperor Arne no
 xxx. 4- Nunahara oki no Mabito, a universal great assembly was held
          in the following five Temples, viz., of the Great Palace, of
          Asuka, of Kahara, of Toyora in Woharida, and of Sakata.
             26th day. Presents of cloth and silk stuffs of various values
          were made to the orphans, to the childless and ,vidowed, and
          to the aged people of the capital.
             Intercalary 12th month. The Viceroy of Tsukushi sent as
          tribute common people, both men and women, of the three
          countries of Karyn, Pekche, and Silla, and also sixty-two priests
          and nuns.
             In this year a serpent and a dog copulated. Presently they
          both died together.
A.D. 687.    1st year,· Spring, 1st month, 1st day. The Prince Imperial,
          accompanied by the Ministers and public functionaries, pro-
          ceeded to the Palace of temporary interment and made
          lament. The N agon 2 Miaruji Fuse no Ason performed the
          ceremony of pronouncing a eulogy. When the eulogy was
          over they all raised a lament. Next the common people made
          lament. Upon this ~fabito, Ki no Ason, and others of the High
          Ste\vards of the Palace, made offerings of food. When this was
          done, the U neme of the Steward's Department raised a lament.
          Then music \\~as performed by the officials of the Department of
          Music.
             5th day. The Prince Imperial, accompanied by the Ministers
          and public functionaries, proceeded to the Palace of temporary
          1 The nengo or year periods are dropped again and the old Inethod of

        reckoning by the year of the reign reverted to.
          2 More familiar in the combinations Dainagon and Chunagon.      The \vord
        means Speaker, not inappropriate to his function on the present occasion.
                                   JITO.                                43°
interment and made lament. The comnlon people followed and
raised lamentation.
   15th day. Presents of various values, of coarse silk and floss
silk, were given to those residents of the capital who \vere eighty
years of age or more, to invalids whose cases were grave, and
to poor persons who were unable to support themselves.
   19th day. Norimaro, Tanaka no Ason, of Jiki-kwo-shi rank, xxx. 5
with Karita, Mori no kimi, of Tsui-dai-ni rank, and others were
sent to Silla to announce the Emperor's decease.
   3rd month, 15th day. Fifty-six immigrants from Koryo were
settled in the province of Hitachi. They were given lands,
received an allowance of grain, and made to pursue their avoca-
tions in peace.
   20th day. An ornamental chaplet was offered at the Palace
of temporary interment. This was called Mikage. 1
   On this day, Maro, Tajihi no Mabito, performed the ceremony
of pronouncing a eulogy.
   22nd day. Fourteen immigrants from Silla were settled in
the province of Shimotsukenu. They were given land and
received an allowance of grain, and made to pursue their
avocations in peace.
   Summer, 4th month, loth day. The Viceroy of Tsukushi
presented priests, nuns and common people, men and women,
twenty-two persons, immigrants from Silla. They were settled
in the province of Musashi, where they were granted lands and
an allowance of grain, and were made to follow their avocations
In peace.
   5th month, 22nd day. The Prince Imperial, accompanied by
the Ministers and public functionaries, proceeded to the Palace
of temporary interment and made lamentation. On this occa-
sion, the chiefs of the Hayato and of Ata in Ohosumi, each
accompanied by his people, advanced in turn and pronouncerl a
eulogy.
   6th month, 28th day. Criminals were pardoned.
   Autumn, 7th month, 2nd day. A decree was issued as fol-
lows :-" Interest may not be received on any debts contracted
  1 Mikage means " august shade."    The wreath was supposed to represent
the deceased Emperor. In a poenl composed by the Empress at this time
there occurs the phrase" talua-kadzura kage ni mietsutsu," Le. "while looking
on the jewel-wreath as thr shadow or representative."
       43°                              N IIIONGI.
        during or previous to the year Kinoto Tori. 1 In cases where
        creditors have already the personal service of their debtors,
        they may not exact (additional) service (by way of) interest. 2
           9th day. Presents of various values were given to the chiefs
        of the Hayato and of Ata in Ohosumi, 337 persons in all.
           8th month, 5th day. Offerings 3 of food were made at the
         Palace of temporary interment. On this day (nothing but) fine
        boiled rice 4 was offered.
           6th day. The aged people of the capital, both men and
xxx. 6. ,"Tomen, all drew near and made lan1entation west of the
        bridge.
           28th day. The Empress sent Ohoshima, Fujihara no Ason,
        of Jiki-dai-shi rank, and Ohotomo Kibumi no Muraji, of Jiki-
        dai-shi rank, to invite together 300 Riu-zo and Dai·toku it to
        the Temple of Asuka, and to present to each a priestly robE.,6
        saying :-" This was made of the august garments of the
        Emperor Arne no Nunahara oki no Mabito." The language of
        the Imperial message was so pathetic that it may not be set
        forth in full.
           9th month, 9th day. A national feast of vegetable food 7 was
        given in the Temples of the capital.
           loth day. A maigre entertainment ,vas given at the Palace of
        temporary interment.
           22nd day. Silla sent Prince Kim Sang-nim, Kim Sal-rno, of
        Keupson rank, Kim In-syul, of Keupson rank, and the Te-sya
        So Yang-sin to petition the Emperor (for advice) regarding the
        Government of that country and to offer tribute. The student-
        priest Chi-ryu arrived along with them. The Viceroy of Tsu-
        kushi having informed Sang-nim and his colleagues of the
        Emperor's decease, they allan that same day put on mourning,

         ) A.D. 685.                   2 The first mention of interest on loans.

         3   The character used denotes specially the autumnal offerings to ancestors.
          4 Cooked down to one-third its original bulk.    Giles. The ,. Shiikai " ex-
       plains this to mean "without fish or flesh." The older reading is "green
       food," for which the interlinear Kana is hijiki-oho, a dish prepared with
       hijiki, a kind of sea-weed.
          & Riu-zo is literally Dragon-elephant (N aga in Sanskrit), and Dai-toku

       great virtue, corresponding to the Sanskrit Bhadanta. Both are compli-
       n1entary expressions for Buddhist dignitaries.
          6 Kesa, in Sanskrit kachAya.

          '1 I'his was the anniversary of Temmu Tenno's death.
                                 JITO.                             43°
and with their faces turned to the East made obeisance three
times, and three times raised lamentation.
   Winter, loth month, 2znd day. The Prince Imperial,
accompanied by the Ministers and public functionaries, as well
as by the Governors of provinces, and the Kuni no Miyakko,
together with common people, both men and women, began
the construction of the Oho-uchi Misasagi.
   12th month, loth day. Tomi, Michi no Mabito, of ]iki-
kwu-san rank, was appointed Imperial Envoy for the enter-
tainment of the Silla guests.
   This year \vas the )'ear Hinoto I (24th) of the Cycle.
   2nd year, Ist month, 1st day·. The Prince Imperial, accom- A.D. 688.
panied by the Ministers and public functionaries, went to the
Palace of temporary interment and made lanlentation.
   2nd day. A company of priests made lament at the Palace
of temporary interrnent.
   8th day. A public great congregation 1 was held in the
Temple of Yakushi.
   23rd day. The decease of the Emperor was formall,Y
announced to Kim Sang-nim and his colleagues. Kim xxx. 7·
Sang.nim and his colleagues thereupon made lalnent three
times.
   2nd month, 2nd day. The Viceroy presented the tribute
from Silla. It consisted of such things as gold and silver, thin
silks, cloth, skins, copper, and iron-more than ten articles in
all. There were also presented separately such things as
images of Buddha, all kinds of coloured fine silks, birds, and
horses, more than ten articles in all. Sang-nim's presents
were gold and silver, coloured stuffs, and all manner of
rarities, altogether more than eighty articles.
   loth day. Sang-nim and his colleagues were entertained in
the Tsukushi Government House, and received presents of
various values.
   16th day. A decree was issued, as follows :-" In future, on
all days of national mourning it is absolutely necessary that
abstinence should be practised." ~
   29th day. Sang-nim and his colleagues took their departure.
  1 Of priests.
  2 Some nlake this refer to a monthly fast on the day of the Elnperor's
decease, others to an an~ual observance.
        43°                               N IIIONGI.
           3rd month, 22nd day. An ornamental chaplet was offered
        at the Palace of temporary interment. Ohoshima, Fujihara
        no Ason, pronounced a eulogy.
           5th month, 8th d.ay. Tok-na-ri, Kyong-su of Pekche was
        transferred to the province of Rahi.
           6th month, 11th day. There was an Imperial decree,
        ordering that all prisoners throughout the Empire who had
        been guilty of capital crimes should have their punishment
        mitigated by one degree, and that those who were in prison
        for lighter offences should be all pardoned. Orders were given
        to the Empire that for this year (only) half the commuted
        taxes should be levied.
           Autumn, 7th month, 11th day. By reason of the drought,
        there was great praying for rain.
           20th day. The Pekche priest Duzu was commanded to pray
        for rain. Before a morning had passed, rain fell plentifully
        throughout the Empire.
           8th month, loth day. Offerings of food were made, and
        lament raised at the Palace of temporary interment. On
        this occasion Yasumaro, Ohotomo no Sukune, pronounced a
        eulogy.
xxx. 8.    11th day. Prince Ise, of Ju-dai-shi rank, was commanded
        to announce the state to be observed at the funeral.
           25th day. The King of Tamna sent his Minister Kara with
        tribute of the productions of the country.
           9th month, 23rd day. Rara, Minister of Tamna, and his
        companions were entertained at the Government House of
        Tsukushi, and received presents of various values.
           Winter, 11th month, 4th day. The Prince Imperial, accom-
        panied by the Ministers and public functionaries, as well as
         by the guests from the frontier lands, went to the Palace of
        temporary interment and made lamentation. On this occa-
        sion offerings of food were made, and the Tate-fushi 1 dance
        performed.
           The Ministers each advanced in turn and pronounced a
         eulogy, setting forth the circumstances of the services rendered
         by their ancestors.

          1   Shield-measure.   So called because danced with shields (and swords)
        In the hands of the performers.   Ten persons took part in it.
                                    JITO.                               43°
   5th day. More than J90 Yemishi brought tribute on their
backs, and in this fashion pronounced a eulogy.
   11th da~y. Miaruji, Fuse no Ason, and Miyuki, Ohotomo no
Sukune, pronounced eulogies alternately.
   Chitoko, Tahema no Mabito, of Jiki-kwo-shi rank, in a
eulogy recited the succession to the throne of the Ilnperial
ancestors. When this ceremony was finished, the Emperor
was buried in the Ohouchi 1 Misasagi.
  12th month, 12th day. Two hundred and thirteen Yemishi,
men and women, were entertained under the tsuki tree west
of the Temple of Asuka. Ranks were besto\\'ed on them, and
they received presents varying in value.
   3rd year, Spring, 1st month., 1st day. The Empress gave A.D. 689-
audience to the ten-thousand lands 2 in the Front Hall.
   2nd day. The Departtne~t of Great Learning presented XXX·9·
eighty staves.3
   3rd day. Maro and Kanawori, sons of S11iriko, of Mu-dai-
~hi rank, Yemishi of Kikafu in the district of U tamu in the

   1 In the district of Takechi in Yal11ato, at the village of Goj5 no 1UUTa.

The site is five cho in length by four in width. Five houses for caretakers
are allotted to it. The vault is eight feet wide and nine feet deep, and
contains two stone sarcophagi. It has been plundered, like many others.
  2 "Ten-thousand lands or provinces" seems put for" everybody," "all the
world," as we might say.
  3 The staves were for the purpose of drivin~ out evil spirits, a Cerel110ny

which was performed on the first day of the Hare in each year. The
"Yengishiki" mentions camellia, holly, peach, pllllll, etc., aOlong the woods
used for this purpose. This custom is of Chinese origin. The latcr cu~tom
of driving out evil spirits \vas by scattering beans, and was kno\vn as oni-
yarahi, tsuina, or marne maki. This was practised on the last day of the year.
  Yamada, in his Dictionary, says that a Ulan was dressed up as the deulon
of pestilence; he describes the Cerel110ny gone through of driving hinl a\vay,
and gives other particulars which are worth consult~ng. See also "Sansai-
dzuye," iv. 27.
   Tylor quotes several exanlples of allied superstitious practic'es in his
,'Primitive Culture," ii. p. IlJ9, to which may be added the following froJl1
the" Life of Sir R. Hurton" :-"On Sylvester night the servants went through
a very usual ceremony in Trieste of fonning procession and chev)ling the
evil spirits with sticks and brooms out of the house, and inviting the g-ood
spirits and good luck to come and d\vell with us."' This relllinds one
strongly of the Japanese formula used on this occasion :--" Oni \\fa soto,
fuku wa uchi "-" J)evils out, luck in." The cerenlony too is perforn1ed on
the sanle day of the year.
        390                            NIHONGI.

         province of l\fichinoku, begg-ed permission to shave off their
         hair and become priests. The Empress gave order, saying:-
         "Maro and the other, although young, are of refined tastes,
         and their wishes are limited; so Inuch so that they desire
         nothing but vegetable food and to observe the precepts. l In
         accordance with their request, let them renounce the world
         and practise religion."
            7th day. A banquet was given to the Ministers, and presents
         of raiment were bestowed on them.
            8th day. Norimaro, Tanaka no Ason, and his companions,
         who were sent as Envoys to Silla, returned from thence.
            9th day. The Empress gave orders to the Governor of
         the province of Idzumo to send up to the capital men of the
         frontier lands who had met with stress of weather.
            On this day there were presented to D5shin~ a Yenlishi of
         Koshi, who was a Buddhist priest, an imag~ of Buddha, one
         baptismal banner, one bell and one begging- bowl, coloured
         silks, five feet of each kind, five bundles of floss silk, ten tan of
         cloth, ten mattocks, and one saddle.
            Ahada no Mabito no Ason, Viceroy of Tsukushi, and others
         presented to the Empress 174 Hayato,2 with fifty fathoms of
         cloth, six ox hides, and fifty deer-skins.
            15th day. The civil and military officials brought presents
          of firewood.
            16th day. A meal was given to the public functionaries.
            18th day. The Empress visited the Palace of Yoshino.
            20th day. The Empress arrived from the Palace of
          Yoshino.
            2nd month, 13th day. The Empress gave orders that reliefs
         should be sent for the Barrier Wardens of Tsukushi who had
         completed their term of years.
            26th day. Prince Takeda, of Jr,-kwo-shi rank, Nemaro,
          Hashi no Sukune, of Jiki-kwo-shi rank, Mara, Ohoyake no
xxx. 10. Ason, f""ubito. Fujihara no Ason, Sakurawi, Tahema no Mabito,
          of Mu-dai-shi rank, Yamamori, Hodzumi no Ason, Omimaro,
           1  The ten Buddhist commandments. Vide Eitel, S'ikch~pada.
           2  I suspect that the use of the Hayato as an Imperial Guard began at
         this time; if th is be so, the legend related of the reason why the Hayato
         were vassals of the Elnperor (see Vol. I. p. 107) must be of comparatively
         recent origin.
                                  JITO.                               39 1
Nakatomi no Ason, Tayasu, Kose no Ason, and Yasumaro,
Ohomiwa no Ason, were made judges.
   3rd month, 24th day. There was a great amnesty for the
Empire. But those crimes which \vere not pardoned in
ordinary amnesties were excepted fforn this amnesty.
   Summer, 4th month, 8th day. Immigrants from Silla were
settled in the province of Shimotsukenu.
   13th day. His Highness the Prince Inlperial Kusakabe
died.
   20th day. Silla sent Kim To-na, of Keupson rank, and
others on a mission of condolence for the decease of the
Emperor Oki no Mabito. Silla sent up at the same time the
student-priests Mei-so, Kwan-chi, etc. Separately Silla sent
a present of a gold-copper 1 image of Amida, a gold-copper
image of Kwan-ze-on Bosatsu, and an image of I)ai-sei-shi 2
Bosatsu, together with coloured silks and brocades.
   22nd day. Prince Kasuga died.
   27th day. Orders were given to the Local Governors that
their labourers should be allowed four holidays in the month.
   5th month, 22nd day. Nemaro, Hashi no Sukune, was
directed to convey to the Condolence Envo,Ys from Silla, I{im
Tona, of Keupson rank, and his colleagues, an Imperial mes-
sage, as follows :-" The Ministers of the Council of State, by
order of the Empress, make this communication. In the first
year of the reign, Norimaro, Tanaka no Ason and others were
sent to announce the decease of the late Emperor. Then Silla
said that the persons charged to receive an Imperial message
had always had the rank of So-phan. This should also be the xxx. I I.
case on the present occasion. For this reason Norimaro and
his colleagues were unable to deliver the Imperial message
which was entrusted to them. Now if former matters are gone
into, there is the case of the decease of the Emperor who once
ruled the Empire from the Palace of Naniha/ when Kose no
Inamochi and his colleagues were sent to announce it. On
that occasion Kim Chhyun-chhyu, of Ye-son -l rank, received
   1 Copper with a small admixture of g-old.     No doubt the shakudo of
modern times. See" Japanese Metallurgy," by \V. Gov.rland, in the
" Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry," June, 1896.
   2 Sanskrit, Mahanaman.                         a Kotoku Tenno.
   4 Probably Te-a-son is meant.  At least this ,vas his rank above, and no
Silla rank of Y c-son is known.
        39 2                           NIHONGI.

         the Imperial message, so that if it is said that an official of the
         rank of So-phan should receive the .Imperial commands, this
         would be at variance with former precedent.
            Again, when the Emperor who ruled the Empire from the
         Palace of Afunli 1 died, Kim Sal-yu, of II-kil-son rank, was sent
         to offer condolence. But now an official of the rank of Keupson
         offers condolence, which again is contrary to precedent. More-
         over Silla has always addressed the Emperor saying :-' Our
         country, since the reigns of the remote Imperial ancestors or
         Japan, is a land which does service, never allowing the oars of
         its ordered ships to become dry.' Yet now but one ship is
         sent, which is contrary to the ancient rule. And further in
         addressing the Emperor Silla has said :-' Since the reign of
         the remote Imperial ancestor of Japan, we have done service
         with pure hearts.' But you have not been careful to be
         thoroughly faithful in the performance of the functions
         originally entrusted to you. You have broken your true faith
         and have had wilful recourse to arts of flattery. Therefore
         your tribute and the separate presents are sealed up together
         and returned to you. However, the generous affection shown
         to you since the reign of the remote Imperial ancestor of this
         country will not be discontinued. Be therefore more and more
         diligent, more and more watchful, and discharge the duties
         entrusted to you with fear and trembling. The Celestial Court
         will have a still nlore generous affection in case the laws are
         honoured and observed. Do you, Tona and the rest, receive
         this Imperial message and deliver it to your I{ing."
            6th month, 1st day. Garments were presented to the
          Viceroy of Tsukushi and others.
            2nd day. The Imperial Prince Shiki, Sukuna-maro, Sami
xxx. 12. no Ason, of Jiki-kwo-shi rank, Mugohe, Hata no Ason, Muma-
          kahi, Iyobe no Muraji, of Gon-kwo-shi rank, Okina, Mitsugi no
          Imiki, Ta-uchi, Ohotomo no Sukune, of Mu-dai-san rank,
          Tayasu, Kose no Ason, and others were appointed Com-
          missioners for the choice of good words. 2
            19th day. Presents of rice, varying in value in each case,
           1 Tenchi Tenno.
           ~ Explained to be the selection of speciluens of auspicious language of
         ancient and modern times to serve as models for addresses to the Elnpress.
         This office soon fell into abeyance.
                                     JITO.                                  393
were given to Hsu Shou-yen, Sa Hung-k'o, and others of the
Land of Great Thang.
  20th day. The Empress commanded the Viceroy Ahada no
Mabito no Ason and others to give the student-priests Mei-so
and Kwan-chi each 140 kin of floss silk to send to their
teachers and friends in Silla.
   23 rd day. The Silla Condolence Envoys Tona and his col-
leagues were entertained at \Vo-gohori 1 in Tsukushi and were
given presents, varying in the case of each.
   29 th day. A book of legal enactments 2 in twenty-two
volumes was distributed to all the Local Governors.
   Autumn, 7th month, 1st day.          In accordance with his
request, the Buddhist priest Jitoku, Yemishi of Michinoku,
was granted a gold-copper image of Yakushi Butsu and a gold-
copper image of Kwanze-on Bosatsu, a bell, a dish,3 a precious
curtain, an incense burner, and a banner.
   On this day, the Silla Condolence Envoys I(im Tona and
his colleagues took their departure.
   15th day. Orders were given to the Mayors of the Right
and Left divisions of the capital and to the Governors of the xxx. 13-
provinces to build places for the practice of archery."
   20th day. The false Palace guard, Kashihabara no Hiroyama
by name, a man of the district of Shibukaha in the province of
Kahachi, was banished to the province of Tosa. The rank
of Tsui-kw6-san was conferred on Tora, Mibu no Muraji, the
 Palace guard \vho arrested tile false Palace guard Hiroyama.
   1 \\To-gohori nleans" s111all district," and probably m~.ns here the slnaller

of the t\VO Govern111ent establishlnents. There was also an Oho.gohori or
great district in Tsukushi.
  2 An authority quoted by the " Shlikai "states that in the first year of

Tenchi's reign there ,vas prepared a collection of enactments in twenty-two
volumes, which \vere known to the public as the" la\vs of the Afumi Court."
The saIne autl~ority states that there \\7as a revision of these laws in the 2nd
l110nth of the loth year of Tenlmu Tenn6. It is these revised regulations
\vhieh arc referred to in the text. The" Yengishiki," \vhich is still extant,
gives us SOBle idea of the character of these COlllpilations.
   3 A begging bo\vl is meant.       The ",word used is sara, \vhich is \\-"ritten
phonetically with the characters cOlnlnonly used to represent the Sanskrit
5ala, the large tilnber tree uncleI' \vhich Sakyanluni died.
   4 The interlinear Kana gives here ikusa, " war," as the equivalent of the

Chinese ~t, archery. Perhaps ikusa is derived {roln i, root of iru, to shoot,
and kusa, a kind
         394                               NIHONGI.

            23rd day. Presents \vere given to Yatsurina and others,
         Yemishi of Koshi, varying in value in the case of each.
            8th month, 2nd day. The public functionaries assembled in
         the Department of the Shinto religion, where an Imperial
         message was communicated to them respecting matters of the
         Gods of Heaven and Earth.
            4th day. The Empress visited the Palace of Yoshino.
            r6th day. Hunting and fishing were prohibited in the sea
         of ~fuko in the province of Settsu for a distance of rooo paces,
         for a space of 20,000 shiro on the plain of N agino in the district
         of Ate in the province of Kii, and for a space of 20,000 shiro on
         the plains of Minono in the district of Iga in the province of
         Iga. Keepers were attached to these places in the same way
         as to the Sea of Takashi in the district of Ohotori in the
         province of Kahachi.
            17th day. The Ministers received rewards, varying in the
         case of each.
            21St day. The Empress gave orders to the Governor-
         General l of Iyo, N orimaro Tanaka no Ason, and his colleagues,
         saying :-" Let the white swallow caught in the district of
         Mike in the province of Sanuki be set at liberty."
            23rd day. The Enlpress witnessed archery.
            Intercalary 8th month, loth day. The Empress gave orders
         to the Local Governors, saying :-" This winter the registers of
         population are to be made up. Not later than the 9th month,
         let vagabonds be sought out and arrested. As to the militia,
         let those of each province be divided into four parts, and
xxx. 14· having selected one of these, cause the lilen to be trained in
         warlike exercises."
            27th day. Prince Kahachi, of Jo-kwo-shi rank, was made
         Viceroy of Tsukushi. He was granted arms and received
         presents. The rank of Jiki-kwo-ichi was bestowed on Shima,
         Tajihi no Mabito, of Jiki-kwo-ni rank. His fief was increased
         by roo houses, which were added to his former grant.
            9th nl0nth, loth day. Maro, Iso no Kami no Ason, of Jiki-
         kwo-san rank, Mushina, Ishikaha no Ason, of Jiki-kwo-shi
         rank, and others were sent to Tsukushi to deliver patents of
         rank and also to inspect the new castle.

               1   He seems to have had control over the whole island of Shikoku.
                                    JITO.                                 395
   Winter, loth month, 11th day. The Empress visited the
Castle of Takayasu.
   22nd day. Komara, Shimotsukenu no Ason, of Jiki-kwu-shi
rank, represented to the Empress his desire to set free 600
slaves. His petition was granted.
   11th month, 22nd day. Ihanari, Takata no Obito, of Tsui-
kwo-ni rank, was complimented in the market-place on his
proficiency in the use of the three weapons,l and presents were
given him.
   12th month, 8th day. The game of suguroku 2 was pro-
hibited.
   4th year, Spring, 1St month, 1st day. Mononobe no Maro:~ A.D. 690.
no Ason set up great shields. 4 Nakatomi no Ohoshima no
Ason, Minister of the Department of the Shinto religion, recited
(a prayer invoking) blessings from the Gods of Heaven. \Vhen
this was over, Shikofuchi, Imbe no Sukune, delivered to the
Empress-consort the divine seal, sword and mirror. 5 The xxx. 15·
Empress-consort accordingly assumed the. Imperial Dignity.6
1"he 11inisters and public functionaries ranged in order, made
obeisance in rotation/ and clapped their hands.
  1    Bow, s\vord, and lance.
  ~ The    Chinese characters nleall double-six, i.e. dice.       Hepburn gives
backgalnmon as the meaning of the Japanese \vord suguroku or sugoroku.
Yaillada's Dictionary gives the following description of it :-" Sugoroku is
played by t\VO players, with a board called kyoku, separated into twelve
divisions. 'fwelve horses (pieces) are set in rows, distinguished as black
and white. The dice are placed in a bamboo tube, shaken, and thro\vn
out, and the horses Inoved for\vard the number of spaces indicated. The
player who first moves his horses into the enelny's canlp is the winner."
There are other forms of the ganle. I t is said to have come originally
from India.       See Culin's "Korean, Chinese, and Japanese Gan1es,"
p.8I.
  J Maro is probably the personal name, though out of its usual order.

   4 Or a great shield.       Shields were set up as offerings to the Shinto
Gods.
    ;; Another rendering is " the divine tokens, i.e. the s\vord and mirror.~'
   6 The delay \vas no doubt in c0111pliance \vith the Chinese idea of a three

years' mourning.
   'i The "Yengishiki," in describing the ceremony of accessi<Jn and of the
festival of first-fruits; says :-" Those of the fifth rank and upwards stand
up together and advance to the tablet-position in the nliddle of the Court,
\vhere they kneel do\vn and clap their hands four times, eight claps each
time for each. This is what is called in the sacred language Ya-hiraki-te
43°                              NIHONGI.

   2nd day. The Ministers and public functionaries presented
their respects at Court with the same state as at the New
Year's audience.
   Tajihi no Shima no Mabito and Fuse no Miaruji no Ason 1
presented their congratulations to the Empress on her accession
to the throne.
   3rd day. A banquet was given to the Ministers in the inner
precinct.
   7th day. A banquet was given to the Ministers in the inner
precinct, and presents of clothing given them.
   15th day. The public functionaries presented firewood.
   17th day. There was a general amnesty throughout the
Empire. It did not apply, however, to those criminals who
are excepted from ordinary pardons.
   One grade of rank was granted to all persons who already
held official rank.
   Widows, orphans, lone persons, sufferers from grave illness,
and those who from poverty were unable to support themselves
were granted presents of rice, and exempted from commuted
taxes and forced labour.
   20th day. One hundred tokibe ~ were appointed to the
Department of Justice.
  23rd day. Offerings were distributed to the Gods of Heaven
and the Gods of Earth in the Home provinces. Moreover, the
lands and houses allotted for their service were augmented.
  2nd month, 5th day. The Empress went to the embankment
of Wakinokami and inspected the horses of the Ministers and
Daibu.
   11th day. A Buddhist priest of Silla named Chon-kil, Peuk
(eight-open-hand). The Prince Imperial claps his hands first and then retires.
N ext officials of the fifth rank and up\vards clap hands, and finally those of
the sixth or lo\\'er ranks in turn." A Chinese authority states that the
Japanese showed their respect for men of disti nction by clapping- their
hands. The nuo\ber of obeisances varied at different time5 from one
up. The" tablet-position" is probably sonlething like what I have seen in the
Court in front of the Audience I-Iall in Soul, where slabs of stone are let
into the ground \\,ith inscriptions indicating the positions to be taken up by
the officials of each rank.
  1 Shima and Miaruji are the personal names.

  2 Tokibe were officers who held preliminary examinations and comlnitted

prisoners for trial.
                             ]ITO.                           397
Cho-chi, of Keupson rank, and others, fifty persons in all,
immigrated to Japan.                                              xxx. 16.
   17th day. The Empress visited the Palace of Yoshino.
   19th day. A feast of vegetarian food ,vas given within the
inner precinct.
   25th day. Ho-man, of Han Nama rank, and other Silla
men, twelve persons in all, who had COBle as inlmigrants, were
settled in the province of ~f usashi.
   3rd month, 20th day. Rice of the Shima Palace was given
to those inhabitants of the capital and the Home provinces
who were eighty years of age and upwards. Each person had
twenty sheaves, and those \vho had official rank received in
addition two tan of cloth.
    Summer,4th month, 3rd day. Envoys were sent to \vorship
the great abstinence Deity of Hirose and the Wind-gods of
Tatsuta.
    7th day. Presents of rice were made to 5°31 old men and
 old women of the capital and Home provinces. Each person
 had twenty sheaves.
    14th day. An edict was issued, as follo\vs :-" Let all public
 functionaries and people of the Home provinces be divided
 into nine classes according to the ,number of days in \vhich
 they have done service. In the case of those who have official
 rank, reckoning is to be made for six years, and not longer, and
 in the case of those of no rank, for seven years only. In
 accordance with the regulations for the examination of public
 service, let those of the first four classes receive cap-rank in
 proportion to their merits, their services, and the inlportance
 of tIle lIouse to which they belong. Their court costume shall
 be dark purple for those from the rank of Jo-dai-ichi down to
 that of Kwo-ni, bright purple for those from the rank of
 Jo-dai-san to that of Kwo-shi, for the eight Shu 1 grades bright
 purple, for the eight Jiki grades dark red, for the eight Gon
 grades dark green, for the eight Mu grades light green, for the
 eight Tsui grades deep blue, and for the eight Shin grades light
 blue. Apart from this, those of Jo-kwo.. ni or higher rank may
 wear all manner of thin silk gauzes, etc., of one breadth and
 one kind, while those from the rank of Jo.. dai-san to that of
  Tiki-kwo-shi may wear all manner of thin silk gauzes, etc., of
                        1 See abov~, p   368.
  VOL.   II                                           D d
        43°                            NIIIONCiI.

         one breadth and two kinds. Both the higher and lower ranks
         should ordinarily wear girdles of variegated silk and white
xxx. 17. trousers. Other matters to remain as usual."
            22nd day. By reason of a drought, rain was begun to be
         prayed for in various places.
            5th month, 3rd day. The Empress went to the Palace of
         Yoshino.
            loth day. Twenty-one immigrants from Pekche, men and
         women, arrived.
            15th day. Discourses on "dwelling in peace" 1 were begun
         in the inner precinct.
            6th month, 6th day. The Empress visited Hatsuse.
            25th day. All persons whatever, possessed of official rank,
         were summoned, and the order of their rank and their ages
         proclaimed.
            Autumn, 7th month, 1st day. The Ministers and public
         functionaries put on the new Court costume for the first time.
            3rd day. Offerings were distributed to the Gods of Heaven
         and the Gods of Earth.
            5th day. The Imperial Prince Takechi was made Dajo..
         daijin, the rank of Sh6-kw5-san was granted to Tajihi no
         Mabito, and he was made Udaijin. New appointments were
         also made to all the eight Departments of State and the
         bureaus.
            6th day. New appointments were made of viceroys and
         governors of provinces.
            7th day. An Imperial Order was made that the Ministers,
         public functionaries, and all persons holding official rank
         should in future put on their Court costumes in their own
         houses, and so present themselves before the opening of the
         gate.
            9th day. An Imperial edict was issued, as follows :-" When
         those occupying the higher places at a Court assembly see a
         Prince of the Blood, the usual ceremony is to be observed;
         when a Daijin and a Prince appear, everyone should stand up
         before the Hall; if two or more Princes appear, everyone
         should get down from his seat and kneel."
            14th day. An Imperial edict was issued, as follow5 :_H When
          1 The Buddhist retirement for meditation during the rainy season, a sort

        of Lenten retreat. See above, p. 360.
                                  JlT O                       399
those occupying the higher places at a Court assembly see a
Daijin, they should move their seats and kneel do\vn."
   On this day alms of coarse silk, raw silk, floss silk, and cloth
were given to 3363 priests of the seven temples who had taken
part in the "retreat." 1 Separately alms \vere bestowed, on
behalf of the Prince Imperial, on 329 priests of three temples
\\rho had taken part in the" retreat."
   18th day. Envoys \vere sent to \vorship the Great Absti-
nence Deity of Hirose, and the Wind-gods of Tatsuta.                xxx. 18.
   8th month, 4th day. The Ernpress visited the Palace of
 Yoshino.
   11th day. Silla immigrants were settled in the province of
 Shimotsukenu.
    9th month, 1st day. An edict \vas addressed to the governors
 of all the provinces, as follo\vs :-" In preparing the returns of
 population, let the house-regulation~be attended to."
    11th day. A decree was issued, as follows :-" As \Ve are
 about to make a tour in the province of Kii', let no land-tax or
 poll-tax be collected for the year in the capital."
    13th day. The Empress proceeded to I\:il.
    23rd day. Three priests who had gone to the Land of Great
 Thang for study, named Chi.. shiu, Gi-toku, and Ju.. gwan, and
 a private soldier named Ohotomobe no l-Iakama, of the dis . .
 trict of Upper Yame in the province of Tsukushi, returned to
 Tsukushi in the train of the Silla Escort Envoy, Kim Ko-hun,
 of Te-na-ma rank.
    24th day. The Empress returned from KiL
    \Vinter, loth month, 5th day. The Empress visited the
 Palace of Yoshino.
    loth day. Chi-shiu and the other priests who had been to
 Thang for study arrived in the capital.
    15th day. ]VIessengers were sent to Prince Kahachi, Viceroy
 of Tsukushi, and his colleagues with the following order:-
 "In entertaining the Silla Escort Envoy, Kim Ko-hun, of Te-
 na-ma rank, and his colleagues, let the precedent be followed
 of the Escort Envoy, who escorted up the student Wohi,
 Hashi no Sukune, and his companions. The attentions paid
 them and the presents given them must follow strictly the
 edict."
                       1   See above, p. 398, note.
        400                              NIHONGI.

            22nd day. An Imperial order was given to Ohotomobe no
         Hakama, a private soldier of the district of Upper Yame in
         the province of Tsukushi, saying :-" You were taken prisoner
         by the Thang troops in the seventh year of the reign of the
         Empress Arne toyo-takara-ikashi-hi-tarashi-hime during the
         campaign undertaken for the assistance of pekche. At length,
         in the third year of the Emperor Arne mikoto hirakasu wake,
         the four men Hoto Hashi, no Muraji, Oyu, Kohori no Muraji,
xxx. 19. Satsuyama, Tsukushi no Kimi, and Gen Jitsu-ni,1 Yuge no
         Muraji, wished to inform the Emperor of the designs of the
         men of Thang, but, as they had neither clothing nor provisions,
         they were, to their sorrow, unable to carry out their purpose.
         Upon this you, Hakama, said to Hashi no Hoto and the
         others, 'I should like to return to our own Court along with
         you, but for want of clothing and provisions we cannot all
         depart together. I pray you, sell me as a slave, and use the
         money to buy food and clothing.' Acting on your proposal,
         Hota and his companions were enabled to communicate with
         the Celestial Court, and you alone remained in a foreign
         land for the space of thirty years until now. We are pleased
         with the loyalty and patriotism which led you to sell yourself,
         and thus display your fidelity. As a mark of distinction for
         this meritorious service We therefore grant you the rank of
         Mu-dai-shi, with five pieces of coarse silk, ten bundles of floss
         silk, thirty tan of cloth, 1000 sheaves of rice, and four cho of
         rice-land, to be continued to your great-grandchildren, and
         your relations of the three classes 2 are exempted from forced
         labour."
            29th day. The Imperial Prince Takechi inspected the site
         for the Palace of Fujihara. He was accompanied by the
         Ministers and public functionaries.
            11th month, 7th day. Presents were given to the Escort
         Envoy Kim Ko-hun and his colleagues, of varying value in
         the case of each.
            11th day. In compliance with an Imperial order, the use of
         the Yiian-kia and I-feng calendars was begun. 3
           1Apparently a Chinese name which he had taken to himself.
           2H is father and nlother, brothers and sisters, and \\life and children.
          3 Yiian.kia is the Chinese period fronl 424 to 453; I.feng from 676 to 67 8 .

         The" Sandai jitsu roku " says: "First the Yiian-kia calendar was used, and
                                JITO.                              40]

    12th month, 3rd day. The Escort f:nVO)T Kim I~o-hun and
his colleagues took their departure.
    12th day. The Empress \vent to the Palace of Yoshino.
    14th day. The Empress returned from the Palace of
Yoshino.
    Igtll day. The Empress went to Fujihara, and inspected xxx. 20.
the site for the Palace. All the Ministers and public function-
aries accompanied her.
    23rd day. Presents were given to the Ministers and officials
of lower rank, varying in value in the case of each.
    5th year, Spring, 1st month, 1St day. Ranks were bestowed A.D. 69 1 •
on the Princes of the Blood, the Ministers,l the Princesses of
the Blood, the Princesses, and the lady officials of the Palace.
    7th day. Presents of eatables, drinkables, and clothing were
given to the Ministers. Rich presents varying in value in the
case of each were made to Yo Syon-k\vang, of Sho-k\vo-shi
rank, and to 'VVon-pong, Nyang-no, and Nam-chyon, of Jiki-dai-
 shi rank, Princes of Pekche.
    13th day. An increase of 2000 houses was made to the fief
of the Imperial Prince Takechi, which, added to his previous
fief, made 3000 houses. To the Imperial Prince Hodzumi, of
Jo-kwu-ni rank, there were given 500 houses; to the Imperial
 Prince Kahashima, of Jo-dai-san rank, roo houses, which, added
 to his previous fief, made 500 houses; to the Udaijin, Tajihi no
 Shima Mabito, ofShu-kwo-san rank, 300 houses, which, added to
 his previous fief, made 500 houses; to thePekche Prince Chyon-
 kwang, of Shu-kwo-shi rank, 100 houses, which, added to his
 previous fief, made 200 houses; to Fuse no Miaruji no Ason, of
 ]iki-dai-ichi rank, and to Ohotomo no Miyuki no Sukune, 80
 houses, which, added to their previous fiefs, made 300 houses.
 Others received additions to their fiefs which varied in amount
  for each.
     14th day. An edict was made, as follo\vs :-" Masaru, Tsuku-
  shi no Fubito, of Jiki-kwo-shi rank, ever since his appointment
  twenty-nine years ago as Secretary to the Viceroy of Tsukushi,
  has been uprig-ht and faithful, and has not been guilty of any
 next the I-feng calendar. The I-feng calendar is the same as the Lin-teh
 calendar (664-665). For details respecting the ancient Japanese calendar
 consult" Bramsen's Chronological Tables."
   1 Probably Ministers is a Inlstake for Princes.
          402                            NIHONGI.

          remissness. He is, therefore, granted a sustenance-fief of
          5000 1 houses, fifteen pieces of coarse silk, twenty-five bundles
          of floss silk, fifty tan of cloth, and 5000 sheaves of rice.
             r6th day. The Empress visited the Palace of Yoshino.
             23 rd day. The Empress returned from the Palace of
          Yoshino.
             2nd month, rst day. The Empress addressed a decree to
XXX. 21   the Ministers, saying :-" In the reigns of the former Emperors
          ye erected Buddhist Halls and Scripture (Sutra) Treasuries,
          and practised the six nlonthly fasts. 2 The Emperors from time
          to time sent Ohotoneri to inquire after the welfare of the priests,
          and the same has also be~n done in Our own reign. Let us
          therefore with zealous hearts continue to uphold the Buddhist
          faith."
             On this day patents of rank were bestowed on officials.
             3rd month, 3rd day. A banquet was given to the Ministers
          in the Western Hall.
             5th day. The Empress inspected the horses both of the
          State and of private persons in the Imperial park.
             22nd day. An edict was issued, as follows :-" If a younger
          brother of the common people is sold by his elder brother, he
          should be classed with freemen: if a child is sold by his parents,
          he should be classed with slaves: persons confiscated into
          slavery by ,vay of payment of interest on debts are to be classed
          with freemen, and their children, though born of a union with a
          slave, are also to be all classed with freemen."
             Summer, 4th month, 1st day. An edict was issued, as follows:
          - " Slaves who have been manumitted in the time of the ancestor
          of a House, and already struck off the register of slaves, may
          not be claimed again as slaves by members of that House."
             Kudara, Kami no Sukuri, Doctor of the University, was
          granted rooo sheaves of the greater tax-rice, as an encourage-
          ment to his learning.
             11th day. Envoys were sent to worship the Great Abstinence
          Deity of Hirose, and the Wind-gods of Tatsuta.
             16th day. The Empress \vent to the Palace of Yoshino.
            1 No doubt a mistake for fifty, as the" Shukai" suggests.
            2 On the 8th, 14th, 15th, 23rd, 29th, and 30th, nothing was eaten after
          noon. On these days the Shitenno (l'chatur Maharadjas) visit the earth
          and take note of the good and evil actions of mankind.
                                  JITO.                                4°3
    22nd day.     The Empress returned from the Palace of
Yoshino.
    5th month, 21st day. Syun-mu-mi-cha of Pekche was com-
mended for his services during the year Midzunoye Saru, \vas
granted the rank of Jiki-dai-san, and received presents of coarse
silk and cloth.
    6th month. Sleet 1 fell in forty places in the capital and
prOVInces.
    19th day. An edict was issued, as follows :-" This summer xxx. 22.
profuse rain has fallen beyond measure, and We fear that cer-
 tainly injury will be caused to the grain-crops. Our anxiety of
 the night lasts until the morning, as We ponder where the blame
for this lies. Now We command you, our Ministers and func-
 tionaries, to prohibit the use of strong drink and animal food,
 to compose your hearts and repent of your sins. 110reover let
 the priests of the Temples of the capital and of the Home
 provinces read the Sutras for a space of five days. It may
 be hoped that this will have some effect."
    The rain had lasted from the fourth month until this month.
    20th day. A general amnesty was proclaimed throughout
 the Empire. Thieves and robbers were, however, excepted.
    Autumn, 7th month, 3rd day. The Empress visited the
 Palace of Yoshino. On this day, Norimaro, Tanaka no Ason,
 Governor of the province of Iyo, and others presented three kin
 and eight rio of silver and a basket of ore of Mount 11imiima-
 yama in the district of Uwa.
     7th day. A banquet was given to the Ministers and presents
  of Court dress made them.
     12th day. The Empress arrived from Yoshino.
     15th day. Envoys were sent to \vorship the Great Abstinence
  Deity of Hirose and the Wind-gods of Tatsuta.
     8th month, 13th day. The Empress commanded eighteen
  Houses [Oho..miwa, Sazaibe, Iso no Kami, Fujihara, Ishikaha,
  Kose, Kashihade be, Kasuga, Kamitsukenu, Ohotomo, Ki, Abe,
  Saheki, U neme, Hodzumi, Adzumi, Heguri, and Rata] to
  deliver to her the records of the tonlbs 2 of their ancestors.
  1 Another reading has rain, which agrees better with the tilne of year and
 with what follows.   The text is in other respects doubtful.
  2 There is another, and preferable reading, which would mean simply

" their ancestral records."
        43°                              NIHONGI.

              23rd day. Envoys were sent to worship the Wind.. gods of
          Tatsuta, and the Gods of Suha 1 and Minuchi, in Shinano.
             9th month, 4th day. Hsii Shan-yen and Sa Hung-k'o, of
xxx. 23. Great Thang, Professors of pronunciation, and Mal-sa and
          Chyon-sin, of Pekche, Professors of writing, received presents
          of twenty rio of silver each.
             9th day. The Imperial Prince Kahashima, of Jo-dai-san
          rank, died.
             23rd day. The posthumous rank of Jiki-dai-ni was granted
          to Ohorne, Saheki no Sukune, and also a contribution made for
         his funeral expenses.
             Winter, loth month, 1St day. There was an eclipse of the sun.
             8th day. A decree was issued, as follows :-" Let the houses
         set apart for the care of the misasagi of former Emperors be
         five or more in number; in the case of others, viz. princes
         of distinguished merit, let three houses be allotted. If the
         misasagi houses are insufficient, let the want be supplied by
         peasants, whose forced labour shall be remitted, and who shall
         be changed once in three years."
            13th day. Long-life places,2 each of 1000 paces, were insti-
        tuted in the Home and other provinces.
            On this day the Empress went to the Palace of Yoshino.
            20th day. The Empress returned from Yoshino.
            27th day. Envoys were sent to perform a service for the
        tranquillity of the new capital. 3
            11th month, 24th day. The festival of first-fruits 4 was held.
        Ohoshima, Nakatomi no Ason, Minister of the Department of
        the Shint() religion, recited the (prayer invoking the) blessing
        of the Heavenly Deities.
            25 th day. Bed-clothes i were presented to the Ministers.
            28th day. Thin silks were given to all from the rank of Minister
        down to that of Secretary. They varied in value for each.
            30th day. An entertainnlent was given to the officials of

         1  Ya-saka-iri hime. Satow's" Handbook," p. 234.
         cz Places \vithin which the taking of animal life was prQhibited-a Buddhist
       institution.
         3 At Fujihara.                                      4 Ohonihe.

         Ii Thickly wadded garments with sleeves, worn at night instead of blankets.

       The practice of making presents of this kind continued up to the Revolution
       of 1868.
                                    lITO.                               43°
the Shinto Department from the Chief down to the Kamibe, and
also to the Governors and others, including common people, both
men and women, of the districts of the provinces of Harima
and Inaba which had furnished (the rice used at the festival).
They received presents of thin silk of various values for each.
   12th month, 2nd day. Toku Ji-chin; of Mu-dai-san rank,
Doctor of Medicine, and Mokuso, Ch()-mu, Shataku, and
Manjiu, Professors of exorcism, were given presents of twenty
rio of silver each.
   8th day. A decree was issued, as follows :-" To the Udaijin
let there be given four cho of land as a site 2 for a house, to those
of the rank of Jiki-kwo-ni and above, two cho, to those of the xxx. 24.
rank of Jiki-dai-san and below, one clto. From the Gon grades
down to officials who have no rank, let the number of in-
habitants of their fiefs be taken as a guide, first class fiefs having
one chB, second class half a cho, and third class a quarter of
a chu. Princes shall fo low the same rule."
   6th year, Spring, 1St month, 4th day. The Imperial Prince A.D. 692 •
Takechi was granted an additional fief of 2000 houses, making,
along with his previous one, a total of 5000 houses.
   7th day. An entertainment was given to the Ministers, and
they received presents of garments.
   12th day. The Empress inspected the road to:; the new
capital.
   16th day. An entertainment was given to officials from the
Ministers down to those of initial rank.
   27th day. The Empress visited Takamiya.
   28th day. The Empress returned from Takamiya.
   2nd month, 11th day. Orders were given to the officials,
saying :-" It is Our intention to proceed to Ise on the third
day of the third month. Take note of this Our purpose, and
get ready all the necessary clothing."
   The priests Ho-zu and Do-ki, Professors of the Yin and Yang,
received presents of twenty rio of silver each.

   1 A Chinese name.     But whether the bearer was a Chinanlan or not is not
clear. I have given the Japanese pronunciation of the characters. The
other names are not Japanese.
  2 Presumably these sites were in the new capital of Fujihara referred to

above.
  3 Or " the roads of.·'
         406                          NIHONGI.

            19th day. Orders were given to the Board of Punishments to
         release short-sentence prisoners.
            On this day, the Chunagon, Takechi-maro, Miwa no Ason, of
         Jiki-dai-ni rank, presented a memorial in which he made bold
         to remonstrate roundly with the Empress for her proposed
         visit to Ise, which he said would interfere with the time for
         agricultural operations.
            3 rd month, 3rd day. Prince Hirose, of J6-kwo-shi rank,
         Chitoko, Tahen1a no Mabito, of Jiki-kwu-san rank, and Yumi-
         bari, Ki no Ason, of Jiki-kwo-shi rank, were appointed to take
         charge of the Palace during the Empress's absence. Upon
         this the Chunagon, Takechi-maro, Miwa no Ason, divested
xxx. 25· himself of his cap-rank and delivered it up to the Court, reite-
         rating his remonstrance, and saying :-" During the season of
         agricultural operations the (Imperial) chariot should not be
         moved."
            6th day. The Empress did not yield to his remonstrances,
         but at length proceeded to Ise.
            17th day. The Empress bestowed cap-rank on the Miyakko
         of the sacred districts 1 through which she had passed, and on the
         Miyakko of the provinces of Iga, Ise, and Shima. These places
         were also released from commuted taxes and forced labour for this
         year. Moreover the commuted taxes and forced labour for the
         year were remitted in the case of the horsemen provided for the
         Empress's service, the baggage-coolies of her officials, and the
         labourers employed in constructing temporary Palaces. There
         was a general pardon for the Empire, which, however, did not
         comprise thieves and robbers.
            19th day. Fifty sheaves of rice for each person were pre-
         sented to men and women of eighty years of age and upwards,
         common people of the province of Shima, through which the
         Empress passed.
            20th day. The Imperial chariot ~ returned to the Palace.
         Wherever it had reached, the officials and people of the district
         were assembled, and care was taken to reward their diligence
         and to have musical performances.
            30th day. Byan Imperial decree, the commuted taxes and
           1  Viz. Ihino, Take and Watarahi, where there were shrines.
           2  The Empress mayor may not have travelled in a chariot. This phrase
         is simply put respectfully for the Inlperial cortege, or the Empress.
                                JITO.                            43°J26
forced labour for this year were remitted to those houses from
which horsemen had been provided for the Empress's service
in the provinces of Afumi, Mino, Wohari, Mikaha, and T6t6mi,
to the baggage-coolies and to the labourers employed in con-
structing temporary Palaces in every province. An Imperial
decree was also made that three sheaves of rice for each man,
and two for each woman, should be given to all poor and
distressed common people in the Empire.
   Summer, 4th month, 2nd day. The posthumous rank of
Jiki-dai-ni was bestowed on Tomokuni, Ohotomo no Sukune,
and a contribution made towards his funeral expenses.
   5th day. With the exception of common people of the
four Home provinces,l the men who had acted as baggage-
coolies were exempted from commuted taxes and forced labour
for the year.
   19th day. Messengers were sent to pray to the Great
Abstinence Deit~y of Hirose and to the Wind-gods of Tatsuta.
   21st day. Mattocks from the Naniha Treasury \vere given
to all persons of official rank, from Princes of the Blood down
to the rank of Tsui-kvJo-shi. These gifts varied in each case.
   25th day. By an Imperidl edict all prisoners and persons xxx 26.
 under sentence of lighter banishment were pardoned and
 discharged.
    5th month, 6th day. Three brothers, named I{ahasemaro,
 etc., fishermen of Agoshi, inhabitants of the district of Muro
 in the province of KiY, who had supplied the Empress's table
 during her stay in the temporary Palace of Ago, were granted
 exemption for ten years from commuted taxes and forced
 labour, and from miscellaneous corvees. Further, eight boat-
 men had their cOlnmuted taxes and forced labour remitted for
 the year.
    7th day. The Governor of the province of Sagami presented
 a pair of fledgling red crows, saying that they had been caught
 in the district of Miura.
    12th day. The Empress visited the Palace of Yoshino.
    16th day. The Imperial chariot returned to the Palace.
    17th day. Daibu were sent as messengers to the celebrated

  1 'lanlato, Yamashiro. Kahachi, and Settsu.   IdzU1Ui was at this tilne
reckoned as a part of Kahachi.
        408                           NIHONGI.

         mountains, and to the hills and rivers, to pray to them for
         raIn.
            20th day. Chitoko, Fumi no Imiki, was granted the post-
         humous rank of Jiki-dai-ichi, and a contribution made towards
         the expenses of his funeral.
            23rd day. Prince N aniha, of J6-kwo-shi rank, and others
         were sent to perform a service for the tranquillity of the site
         of the Palace of Fujihara.
            26th day. Envoys were sent to make offerings to the Great
         Gods of the following four places, viz.: Ise, Yamato, Sumi-
         yoshi, and Kit, and to announce to them the erection of the
         new Palace.
            Intercalary 5th month, 3rd day. Great floods. Com-
         missioners ,vere sent to visit the districts and provinces, one
         after another, making loans to those who, having met with
         disaster, were unable to support thenlselves, and allowing
         them to fish and cut wood in the hills and forests, the ponds
         and marshes.
            An Imperial order was given that the Kin-kwo-mio Sutra
         should be expounded in the capital and in the four Home
         prOVInces.
            4th day. The Buddhist priest Kwan-sei was given a
          present of fifteen hiki of coarse silk, thirty bundles of floss silk,
          and fifty tan of cloth, and he was commended for having n1ade
          white lead. 1
xxx. 27.     13th day. The Great Gods of Ise addressed the Empress,
          saying :-" Let the commuted taxes and forced labour for
          the province of Ise be remitted for this year. That being so,
          the thirty-five kin of red silk yarn forwarded by the two
          districts of the Gods should be reduced in value from next
          year." 2
             15th day. An Imperial order was given to Prince Kahachi,
          Viceroy of Tsukushi, and the rest, saying :-" Let priests be
          sent to Ohosumi and Ata to propagate the Buddhist religion."
          He was further made to send up to the capital the image of
          Amida, made by the Great Thang Chief Envoy Ruo Wu-
           1 U sed as a cosmetic.
           2 The highly respectful character ~ is used {or the address of the Gods
         to the Empress. The interlinear Kana puts the respectful term tamaye in
         the mouths of the Gods, The districts referred to are Take and Watarahi.
                                  JITO.                                 J26

ts'ung, for the Emperor who lived In the Palace of Ohotsu
in Afumi.
   6th month, 9th day. The senior officials of the districts
and provinces were commanded each to pray to the celebrated
mountains, and to the hills and rivers for rain.
   11th day. Daibu were sent as Envoys to the four Home
provinces to pray for rain.
   21st day. Official rank was granted to eight labourers, and
they were commended for their diligence and absence of
remissness in the construction of the Ohouchi Misasagi. 1
   30th day. The Empress inspected the site of the Fujihara
Palace.
   Autumn, 7th month, 2nd day. A general amnesty was
granted throughout the Empire. But this pardon did not
apply to those guilty of the ten ~ crimes, nor to thieves and
robbers.
   Shikofuchi, Fuse no Ason, Governor of the province of
Sagami, and others, with the Vice-Governor of the district of
 Miura, and Kusu, Kashima no ami, who had caught the red
crows, had rank and presents bestowed on them. 1tforeover
the commuted taxes and forced labour \vere remitted to the
district of Miura for three years.
   7th day. A banquet was given to the Ministers.
   9th day. The Empress visited the Palace of Yoshino.
    11th day. Envoys were sent to pray to Hirose and Tatsuta.
    28th day. l""he Imperial car returned to the Palace.
    On this night Mars and Jupiter approached and receded XXX. 28.
from one another four times in the room of one pace,
 alternately shining and disappearing.
    8th month, 3rd day. Criminals \\?ere pardoned.
    17th day. The Empress visited the country-house of the
 Imperial Princess Asuka, and on the same day returned to the
 Palace.
    9th month, 9th day'. Daibu were despatched to the four
 Home provinces, to attend to the distribution of rice-lands.
  1 Of TemnlU Tenno.
  2 Rebellion, conspiracy against the soyereign's person, treason, parricide,
inhumanity (including nlurder and mutilation for nefarious purposes),
sacrilege, unfilial conduct, discord, insubordination, and incest. Mayers,
P·35°·
        4 10                           NIIIONGT.

             14th day. The Department of the Shinto religion laid
          before the Empress four volumes of sacred treasures, I nIne
          keys, and one woode!l stamp.
             21st day. The Governor of the provInce of Ise presented
          two auspicious stalks of rice.
             The Governor of the province of Echizen presented a white
          moth.
             26th day.     An Imperial decree was made, sayIng:-
          "Whereas a white moth has been caught on the shore at
          Uragami in the district of Tsunuga, the fief of the God of
          Kebi is increased by twenty houses, making a total, with
          those already attached to his shrine, of - - .
             Winter, loth month, 11th day. Mikata, Yamada no Fubito,
          was granted the rank of M u-kwo-shi. He had formerly gone
          to study in Silla as a priest.
             12th day. The Empress went to the Palace of Yoshino.
             19th day. The Imperial car returned to the Palace.
             11th month, 8th day. Silla sent Pak Ok-tok, and Kim
          Sim-sal, of Keupson rank, etc., as tribute-bearers. Presents
XXX. 29. were made of various values to Oyu, Okinaga no Mabito, of Jiki-
          kWeJ-shi rank, and to Tsura, Kahachi no Imiki, of Mu-dai-ni
          rank, etc., whom it was proposed to send as Envoys to Silla.
             11th day. Pak Ok-tok, of Silla, was entertained, and received
          presents in the official building of N aniha.
             12th month, 14th day. Hsii Shou-yen and Sa Hung-k'o,
          Professors of (Chinese) pronunciation, received grants of
          rice-land, four chB being given to each.
             24th day. Daibu were sent to deliver the tribute from Silla to
          the five shrines of Ise, Sumiyoshi, !{ii, Yamato, and Unatari. 2
A. n 693.    7th year, Spring, 1st month, 2nd day. The rank of Jo-kwo-
          ichi was bestowed on the Imperial Prince Takechi, and that of
          Jo-kwo-ni on the Imperial Princes Naga and Yuge.
             On this day an Imperial edict was issued directing that the
          common people of the Empire should wear yellow clothing
          and that slaves should wear black.
             7th day. An entertainment was given to the Ministers and
          Daibu.
          1 Probably lists of the contents of the treasuries of the Shinto temples.

        " Shuka1."
          2 In Yamato.   The God worshipped was Taka-mi-danla no Mikoto..
                                  .lITO.                              4 I1
   13 th day. Presents \vere given to all persons of official
rank in the capital and in the Home provinces of the age of
eighty years and up\vards. Each person received one wadded
sleeping garment, t\VO hiki of coarse silk, two bundles of floss
silk, and four tan of cloth.
   15 th day. The posthumous rank of Sho-kwo-san was
granted to Syon-k\vang, Prince of Pekcht\ and a contribution
made to\vards his funeral expenses.
   16th day. Presents of cloth of various values were made to
the men and \vornen of the capital of the age of eighty or
upwards, and to poor and distressed persons.
   A priest of Funase named Ho-kyu was given three chB of
rice-land.
   On this day, men of Aya gave a performance of Arare-
bashiri. 1
   2nd month, 3rd day. Silla sent Kim Kang-nam, of Sason xxx. 30.
rank, and Kim Yang-won, of Han-na-ma rank, to announce
the mourning for the King.'
   10th day. Prince Kinunuhi and his colleagues, the Com-
missioners for the construction of the capital, were ordered to
bury the bodies \vhich had been dug up.
   30th day. Thirty-seven castaways from Silla, named Mucha,
Monye, etc., \vere handed over to Ok-tok and his party.
   3rd month, 1st day. There was an eclipse of the sun.
   5th day. A sustenance-fief of thirty houses was granted to
Kudara, Kami no Sukuri, Doctor of the University, of Gon-
kwv-ni rank, for the promotion of Chinese learning.
   6th day. The Empress visited the Palace of Yoshino.
   11th day. The rank of Jiki-dai-ni, and a contribution for
funeral expenses, were granted to Ohoshima, Fujihara no Ason.
   13th day. The Empress arrived from the Palace of Yoshino.
   16th day. Presents of coarse silk, floss silk, and cloth of
various values were given to Oyu, Okinaga no Mabito, of Jiki-
kwo-shi rank, and Koginli, Ohotomo no Sukune, of Gon-dai-ni
rank, whom it was proposed to send as Envoys to Silla, and
also to the student priests Bentsii and Shinyei.

  1 A song \vith dance.  At the end of each stanza were repeated the \\"ords
1\fan-nen arare, i.e. H May you live for 10,000 years." It is also called
Man-zai-raku.
  ~ King Sin-mun.
        4 12                                NIHONGI.

            Moreover, a present was made for the funeral expenses of
         the King of Silla.
            17th day. An Imperial decree was issued directing that the
         cultivation throughout the Empire of such vegetable pro-
         ductions as the mulberry tree, hemp, pears, chestnuts, and
         greens,t should be encouraged, as auxiliaries to the five grains.
            Summer, 4th month, 17th day. Daibu were sent as Envoys
         to visit the shrines and to pray for rain. Moreover, Envoys
         were sent to pray to the Great Abstinence Deity of Hirose, and
         to the Wind-gods of Tatsuta.
xxx. 31.    22nd day. Ohotomo no Wobito, Vice-President of the
         Inner Treasury, was by an Imperial decree convicted of dis-
         honest practices, reduced two grades in rank, and dismissed
         from the office he then held. Two clerks named Oisome no
         Ohoku and U no no Ohotomo were also convicted of dishonest
         practices, reduced one grade in rank, and dismissed from the
         office which they then held. An auditor named Rose no
         M uraharu, who, although he derived no personal advantage
         from it, was privy to the theft, and allowed it to be committed,
         was therefore reduced in rank by two grades and dismissed
         from his office. Oisome no Ohoku, however, was pardoned,
         on account of his zealous services during the campaign of the
         year Midzunoye Saru. But the proceeds of the dishonest
         practices were confiscated according to law.
            5th month" 1st day. The Empress visited the Palace of
         Yoshino.
            7th day. The Empress arrived from the Palace of Yoshino.
            15th day. A public (Buddhist) great-congregation was held
         within the inner precinct.
            6th month, 1st day. By an Imperial order the Koryn priest
          Pok-ka was restored to the laity.
            4th day. The rank of Jiki-kwo-shi was bestowed on Hirome,
xxx. 32. Hikeda no Ason, Karita, Mari no Kimi, Mara, Kose no Ason,
          Omi-marc, Fujihara no Ason, Tayasu, Kose no Asan, Ike-
          mori, Tajihi no Mabito, and Maro, Ki no Ason, in all seven
         persons.
            Autumn, 7th month, 7th day. The Empress visited the
          Palace of Yoshino.
           1   Giles has   Bra~ssica   rapa or rape-turnip.   The interlinear Kana has
         a\vona, \vhich I h tve followed.
                                  JITO.                                      4 13

   12th day. Envoys were sent to pray to the Great .~bstinence
Deity of Hirose and to the \\!ind-~ods of Tatsuta.
   14th day. Daibu were sent as Envoys to visit the various
shrines and pray for rain.
   16th day. Daibu were sent as Envoys to visit the various
shrines and pray for rain. On this day the Empress arrived
from Yoshino.
   8th month, 1St day. The Empress \vent to the site of the
Palace of Fujihara.
   17th day. The Empress visited the Palace of Yoshino.
   21st day. The Imperial car returned to the Palace.
   9th month, 1st day. There was an eclipse of the sun.
   5th day. The Empress went to the Peak of Tamu no Mine.
   6th day. The Imperial car returned to the Palace.
   loth day. On behalf of the Kiyomibara L Emperor a public
great-congre~ation was held within the inner precincts. All
prisoners were released.
   16th day. The posthumous rank of Jiki-kwo..san was
granted to Konoma, Kaya no Imiki, and a contribution made
for his funeral expenses. In this way his services in the
campaign of the year Midzunoye Saru were rewarded.
   Winter, loth month, 2nd day. It was decreed that from
this year onwards there should be inspections of the arms kept
in store by all, beginning with the Princes of the Blood down
to persons of initial rank. Those of Jo cap.:.rank down to Jiki
cap-rank were each to have one suit of armour, one sword, one
bow, one set of arrows, one elbow· pad/ and one saddle-horse.
Those of Gon cap-rank to Shin or initial cap-rank were each xxx. 33.
to have one sword, one bow, one set of arro\vs, and one elbow-
pad. Such were to be their provision.
   23rd day. The Jin-no 3 Sutra was begun to be expounded
in the hundred provinces. This came to a close after four
 days.
   11th month, 5th day. The Empress went to the Palace of
 Yoshino.
   7 th day. Presents were given to the Prince and Prime
 Minister, etc., of Tamna, of various values.
   loth day. The Imperial car returned to the Palace.
     1   TenlnlU Tenno.                   2   See \To1. I.. note to p. 34.
                          3   Benevolent kinl-{.
  VOL. 11.                                                        E e
        43°                           NIHONGI.

             14th day. The Priests H6-yen, Zen-v, and Shin-gi were
          sent to the district of Yasu in the province of Afumi, to try
           the spring of cordial l waters.
             23rd day. The rank of Jiki-dai-shi was bestowed on Sukuna-
          mara, Hikeda no Ason, of Jiki-kwo-shi rank, and he was
          granted a sustenance-fief of fifty houses.
             12th month, 21st day. Professors of the art of war were
          sent to give instruction and training in the various provinces.
A.D. 694.    8th year, 1St month, 2nd day. The rank of Shu-kwu-shi was
          granted to Miaruji, Fuse no Ason, of Jiki-dai-ichi rank, and to
          Miyuki, Ohotomo no Sukune, with an increase of 200 houses
          to the fiefs of each, amounting with those held by them pre-
          viously to five hundred houses. They were also constituted
          the senior members of their Houses.
             7th day. An entertainment was given to the Ministers.
             15th day. The Empress received presents of firewood.
             16th day. An entertainment was given to the public func-
          tionaries.
             17th day. The nlen of Aya gave a performance of Arare-
          bashiri.
             Those of the fifth rank and upwards had archery.
             18th day. Those of t-he sixth rank and downwards had
          archery. After four days it came to an end.
             19th day. The men of Thang gave a performance of Arare-
          bashiri.
             21st day. The Empress visited the Palace of Fujihara, and
          returned to the Palace on the same day.
xxx. 34.     23rd day. The ranks of Mu-kwo-shi, etc., were conferred on
          seven men of Great Thang and two Sushen (Manchus).
             24th day. The Empress visited the Palace of Yoshino.
             3rd month, 1st day. There was an eclipse of the sun.
             2nd day. Maro, Ohoyake no Ason, of Jiki-kwo-shi rank,
          Yashima, Utena no Imiki, of Gon-dai-ni rank, and Honjitsu,
          Kibumi no Muraji, were appointed Governors of the mint for
          (copper?) cash. 2

           1 The interlinear Kana has ko-zake, a kind of s\\'eet liquor made from

        rice. A natural spring is meant, perhaps with some Inedicinal qualities.
        See below, XXX 34.
           2 The appointment of two mint officials with a nearly similar title is

        recorded in the" Shoku Nihongi "under the year 708, 2nd month. It is
                                     JITO.                                 43°
   11th day. An Imperial edict was issued, as follows :-" In
all cases where persons of no official rank are appointed as
District Governors, the chief officials shall receive the rank of
Shin-kwu-ni, and the assistants that of Shin-dai-san."
there stated that these officials \vere then appointed for the first time. The
so-called first discovery of copper in Japan in this year relates only to a find of
native copper in the province of Musashi. This \-vas the occasion of the
nanle \\tado (workable copper, not mere ore) being given to the year-period
which began with 708.
    The ,. Nihonshi " contains a notice under the year 698 of copper being pre..
sented by the province of Inal->a. This is the first historical notice of the
production of copper in Japan. It is probable, ho\ve,"er, that copper \vas
worked long before this tilne in a country which is so rich in ores of this
metal. The gold-copper inlages of Buddha referred to in Suiko Tenno's
reign, p. 133, Vol. I I. A.D. 6°5, may have been lllade of Japanese copper,
though there is no direct evidence to this effect, and {raIn the frequent
mention of copper and other metals among the" tribute " articles brought
from Corea, it is evident that imported copper \vas well known. The Sun-
goddess Myth (Vol. 1. p. 47) speaks of copper, and there is frequent ll1ention
of mirrors and bells which \vere nlade chiefly of copper.
    I think it is not too Inuch to say that there is no positive evidence what-
ever in the" Kojiki" or "N Ihongi " of the use of bronze in ancient Japan.
The Japanese word for bronze, viz. karakane or metal of Kara, indicates that
 the Japanese first became acquainted with this lnetal afi an importation
from Corea. This \vord does not occur in the" Nihongi," but the term
 copper may have sOluetimes included the nlixed metal. Besides, the luore
 ancient specimens of bronze found in Japan do not contain lead, which is
 a characteristic constituent of the karakane introduced from China in later
 times, so that the absence of this term from the" Nihongi "is not conclusive.
 It is, nevertheless, curious, when we remenlber the frequency \vith which
 bronze is referred to in Homer, that no specific mention of this metal is to
 be found in the ancient Japanese records.
    The evidence of the use of bronze in Japan, however, is not confined
 to literature. Mr. W. Gow!and has examined a number of bronze swords and
 other objects dug up chiefly in Kiushiu under circUlllstances \vhich point to
 a great antiquity, and he infonns me that an actual 1110uld in which they
 ,"ere cast has been discovered in Chikuzen. No iron objects of equal age
 have been found. Those who are interested in this subject ,,·ould do \vell
 to consult Mr. Gowland's" Art of Casting Bronze in Japan," contributed to
 the " Journal of the Society of Arts " in May, 1895.
    The case for a bronze age in Japan presented by him is a strong one, but
 how far the existence of the objects which he describes can be explained by
  the frequent commercial relations of Japan \\'ith the continent is a question
  on which I shall offer no opinion.
     See also Anderson's" Glyptic Art" in Introduction to Murray's" Hand-
  book," 2nd ed. p. [1°9]. et seqq.
         416                              NIHONGI.

            r6th day. The Empress made an edict, as follows :-" In
         the seventh year of our reig-n, the year Midzunoto Mi of the
          Cycle, a spring of cordial waters bubbled up at Mount Tsuga-
         yama in the district of Yasu in the province of Afumi. Persons
         afflicted with all manner of diseases went to stay at the Temple
         of Yasudera, and great numhers were healed. Therefore four
         chi) of rice-land and sixty tan of cloth are granted to it, and the
         district ofYasu is exempted for this year from commuted taxes
         and forced labour, and from miscellaneous corvees. The local
         authorities, from the chief down to the clerks, are advanced
         one grade in rank. To those who first made proof of the
         spring of cordial waters, viz. Kadono no Hatsuki and the
         daughter of Kudara no Tsurara, these are given two hiki of
         coarse silk each, ten tan of cloth, and ten mattocks."
            22nd day. Offerings were presented at the various shrines.
            23rd day. Presents of coarse silks and cloth, varying in
         value in the case of each, were made to the officials of the
         Department of the Shinto religion from the chief down to the
          Hafuri, in all 164 persons.
            Summer, 4th month, 5th day. The posthumous rank of
          Ju-dai-shi was conferred on Prince Kahachi, Viceroy of
         Tsukushi, and a contribution made towards his funeral
         expenses.
            7th day. The Empress went to the Palace of Yoshino.
            I3 th day. Envoys were sent to pray to the Great Abstinence
          Deity of Hirose and to the Wind-gods of Tatsuta.
xxx. 35.    14th day. The Empress arrived back from the Palace of
          Yoshino.
            17 th day. A contribution was sent towards the funeral
         expenses of the Doctor of Law 1 Du-yen.
            5th month, 6th day. The Ministers and Daibu were enter-
         tained within the inner precincts (of the Palace).
            11th day. One hundred copies of the Kin-kwo-myu Sutra
         were sent and deposited in the various provinces, to be read
         without fail when the moon of the first month was in her first
         quarter. The fees (to the priests) were to be defrayed from
          the public revenues 2 of the province.
            6th month, 8th day. A white copper-pheasant was presented
               1   Risshi, a rank in the Buddhist priesthood.
               2   There is no question of tnoney here, everything \vas in kind.
                               JITO.                     43°
by the district of Sarara in the province of Kahachi. The
Governor and Vice-Governor of the district of Sarara received
each a grade of rank and presents, and the rank of Shin-kwo-ni
was granted to Ka.rakuni, Osakabe no Miyakko, who had caught
it. He also received presents.
   Autumn, 7th month, 4th day. Inspectors 1 ,vere sent to the
provinces.
   15th day. Envoys were sent to pray to the Great Absti-
nence Deit~y of Hirose and to the Wind-gods of Tatsuta.
   8th month, 17th day. One hundred and four priests were made
to enter religion for the sake of the Imperial Princess Asuka.
   9th month, 1st day. There was an eclipse of the sun.
   4th day. The Empress proceeded to the Palace of Yoshino.
   22nd day. Prince Mino, of Jo-kwo-shi rank, was appointed
Viceroy of Tsukushi.
   Winter, loth month, 20th day. The rank of Shin-dai-shi
was bestowed on a man of the district of Araki, in the province xxx 36.
of Hida, named Otokunibe no Otohi, who had caught a white
bat. He also received a present of four hiki of coarse silk, four
bundles of floss silk, and ten tan of cloth, and his house was
exempted from all forced labour whatever during his life.
   11th month, 26th day. There was an amnesty for criminals,
from those guilty of capital crimes downwards.
   12th month, 6th day. The Empress removed her residence
to the Palace of Fujihara.
   9th day. The public functionaries paid their respects at
Court.
   10th day. Presents of various values were made to all from
the Princes of the Blood down to the Governors of districts,
consisting of coarse silk, floss silk, and cloth.
   12th day. A banquet was given to the Ministers and
Daibu.
   9 th year, Spring, 1st month, 5th day. The rank of Jo-kwu- A.D. 695·
ni was conferred on the toneri of Imperial Princes.
   7th day. An entertainment was given to the Ministers and
Daibu within the inner precinct (of the Palace).
   15th day. Firewood was presented to the Empress.
   16th day. An entertainment was given to the public
functionaries.
                        1   Jun-satsu-shi.
        43°                                NIHONGI.

              17th day. There was archery lasting for four days.
              Intercalary 2nd month, 8th day. The Empress went to the
           Palace of Yoshino.
              15th day. The Imperial car returned to the Palace.
              3 rd month, 2nd day. Silla sent Prince Kim Nyang.. nim, the
           Po-nyong 1 Pak Kang-kuk, of Sal-son 2 rank, and Kim Chyu-
           han and Kim Chhyung-syon, of Han-na-ma rank, to present a
           memorial regarding the government of their country, to offer
           tribute and to bring presents.
              11th day. The Empress went to the Palace of Yoshino.
              14th day. The Empress arrived from Yoshino.
              2znd day. Hakase, Fumi no Imiki, of Mu-kwu-ni rank,
          Shimo-osa:' no Morota, of Shin-kwo-san rank, and others
          wer:e sent to Tane 4 to obtain the barbarians' dwelling-place.
              Summer, 4th month, 9th day. Envoys were sent to pray to
          the Great Abstinence Deity of Hirose and to the Wind-gods
xxx. 37. of Tatsuta.
             17th day. The posthumous rank of Jiki.kw6-san was con·
          ferred on Yemishi, Kamo no Ason, and a contribution made
         towards his funeral expenses. [His original rank was Gon-
         dai-ichi.] The posthumous rank of Jiki-dai-shi was conferred
         on Akamaro, Fumi no Imiki, and a contribution made towards
         his funeral expenses. [His original rank was Dai-san-chiu.]
             5th month, 13th day. An entertainment was given to the
         Hayato of Oho·sumi.
             21st day. The Empress witnessed wrestling by the Hayato
         at West a Tsuki no mota.
             6th month, 3rd day. Daibu were sent as Envoys to visit the
         shr~nes of the capital and the four Home provinces and pray
         for rain.
             16th day. Honorary gifts of various values were made to
         all high officials who were eighty years of age or more, or who
         were affected by chronic disease.

         1   Apparent! y the name of an office.     2 The proper word is Chap-son.
         a Shimo-osa means junior interpreter.    There was a family of this name,
       but it is not quite clear that the name and function did not go together in
       this case.
         .. Viz. Tanegashima, an island ofT the south coast of Satsuma.
         5 Referring to its position West of the Temple of Asuka.     Tsuki is the
       name of a tree, the Planera.
                            lITO.                      43°
   18th da)r. The Empress went to the Palace of Yoshino.
   26th day. The Empress arrived from Yoshino.
   Autumn, 7th month, 23rd day. Envoys were sent to pray
to the Great Abstinence Deity of Hirose and to the \Vind-gods
of Tatsuta.
   26th day. Presents \vere made of various values to the
Envoys whom it was proposed to send to Silla, viz. Kenu,
Wono no Ason, of Jiki-k\vu-shi rank, Hakatoko, Yuki no
M uraji, of M u-dai-ni rank, and others.
   8th month, 24th day. The Empress went to the Palace of
Yoshino.
   30th day. The Empress arrived from Yoshino.
   9th month, 4th day·. The prisons were visited, and those
persons were released who were suffering sentences of minor
banishment or imprisonment.
   6th day. Kenu, Wono no Ason, and his colleagues started
for Silla.
   loth month, 11th day. The Empress went to Yonahari In
Ucla.
  12th day. The Empress arrived from Yonahari.
  12th month, sth day. The Empress went to the Palace of
Yoshino.
  13th day. The Empress arrived from Yoshino.
  Prince Hatsuse was granted the (posthumous) rank of }o-
dai-shi, and a contribution made for his funeral expenses.
  loth year, Spring, 1st month, 7th day. The Ministers and A.D. 696.
                                                            XXX. ]s.
Daibu were entertained.
  11th day. The rank of ]iki-dai-shi was conferred on Nam-
chyon, Prince of pekche.
  15th day. Firewood was presented to the Empress.
  16th day. An entertainment was given to the Ministers and
public functionaries.
  18th day. The Ministers and public functionaries had
archery at the South Gate.
  2nd month, 3rd day. The Empress went to the Palace of
Yoshino.
  13 th day. The Empress arrived from Yoshino.
  3 rd month, 3rd day. The Empress went to the Palace of
Futa-tsuki.
  12th day" Presents were given of coats and trousers of
         4 20                         NIHONGI.

        brocade, of dark red and deep purple coarse silks, of axes, etc.,
        to Inari and Ivlushi, Yemishi of Watarijima of Koshi, and to
        Shirasu and Yeso, men of Sushen.
           Summer, 4th month, loth day. Envoys were sent to pray
        to the Great Abstinence Deity of Hirose and to the \Vind-gods
        of Tatsuta.
           27th day. The rank of Tsui-dai-ni was conferred on Mono-
        nobe no Kusuri, of the district of Kazehaya in the province of
        Iyo, and to 1'Iibu no Moroshi, of the district of Kahashi in the
        province of Higo. Moreover, each of them received presents
        of 4- hiki of coarse silk, 10 bundles of ra\v silk, 20 tan of cloth,
        20 mattocks, 1000 sheaves of rice, and 4 chu of rice-land.
        They were excused from the commuted taxes and forced
        labour due from their houses. This was by way of consolation
        for their long sufferings in the Thang country.l
           28th day. The Empress went to the Palace of Yoshino.
           5th month, 2nd day. By Imperial command the title of
        Imiki was conferred ~ on Tsunade, Hada no Miyakko, of Dai-
        kin-jo rank.
xxx. 39. 4th day. The Empress arrived from Yoshino.
           8th day. The rank of Jiki-kwo-shi was conferred on Oho-
        sumi W ohari no Sukune, and he was also given forty cho of
                t

        rice-land.
           13th day. The posthumous rank of Jiki-kwo-shi was granted
        to Momoye, Oho-koma no Muraji, and a contribution given
        towards his funeral expenses.
           6th month, 18th day. The Empress ,vent to the Palace of
        Yoshino.
           26th day. The Empress arrived from Yoshino.
           Autumn, 7th month, 1st day. There was an eclipse of the sun.
           2nd day. Criminals were pardoned.
           8th day. Envoys were sent to pray to the Great Abstinence
        Deity of Hirose and to the Wind..gods of Tatsuta.
           loth day. His Highness the after 3 Imperial Prince died.

          1 They were taken prisoners in the campaign undertaken for the support

        of pekch6. See above, XXV I I. 7.
          2 This was a posthumous honour.

          3 The "Shiikai" thinks that we should read     Prince I mperial here.
        Prince Takechi is meant, who stood second in the line of succession.
        Hence the epithet" after."
                                  JITO.                              4 21
   8th month, 25th day. The rank of Jiki-kwo-ichi was con-
ferred on Homuchi, Oho no Omi, and presents given him as a
reward for his services from the beginning, and for his strict
guardianship of the barrier. 1
   9th month, 15th day. The posthumous rank of Jiki-dai-ichi
was conferred on Ihose, Waka-zakurabe no Ason, and a contri-
bution made towards his funeral expenses, in honour of his
services from the beginning.
   Winter, loth month, 17th day. The Udaijin, Tajihi no
Mabito, was granted (pernlission 2 to use) a carriage and a staff,
and so in this way sympathy was shown on his retirement from
office.
   22nd day.      One hundred and twenty retainers were
granted to the U daijin, Tajihi no Mabito, of Sho-kwo-san
rank; eighty each to the Dainagon, Miaruji, Abe no Ason,
and Miyuki, Ohotomo no Sukune, both of Sho-kwu-shi rank,
and fifty each to 1vIaro, Iso no Rami no Ason, of Jiki-
kw6~ichi rank, and Fubito, Fujihara no Ason, of Jiki-kwo-ni
rank.
   11th month, loth day.       Thirty houses were granted as a
sustenance-fief to Bendu, a priest of the Great Temple of the
Great Palace.
   12th month, 1st day. An Imperial order was given that the
Kin-kwu-myo Sutra should be expounded, and that every year
on the last day of the twelfth month ten persons of a pure life
should be made to enter religion.
   11th year, Spring, 1st month, 7th day. An entertainment A.D. 697.
was given to the Ministers and Daibu.
   11th day. Presents of rice in ear of various values were
given to all widowers, widows, orphans, and childless persons,
to those suffering from grave disease, and to those who from XXX,4C •
poverty were unable to support themselves, throughout the
Empire.
   16th day. An entertainment was given to the Ministers and
public functionaries.
   2nd month, 28th day. Kunimi, Tahema no Mabito, of
Jiki-kwo-ichi rank, was appointed Grand Tutor of the Heir
   1 He was warden of the Suzuka barrier, on the road to Fuha, during the

civil \var.
  2 On account of his ag-e.
4 22                             NIHONGI.

Apparent,l Atomi, Michi no 1\fabito, of ] iki-kwo-san rank, was
appointed Director of the Spring Palace,2 and Ahamochi, Kose
no Ason, of Jiki-dai-shi rank, Assistant Director.
   3rd month, 8th day. A public great-congregation was held
at the Eastern Palace. 3
   Sumrrler, 4-th month, 4th day. Ranks, from that of J6 to
that of Jiki, \vere conferred on the selected persons (for office),
discrimination being made in the case of each.
   7th day. The En1press went to the Palace of Yoshino.
   14th day. Envoys were sent to pray to Hirose and Tatsuta.
   On this day the Empress arrived from Yoshino.
   5th montll, 8th day. Daibu \vere sent as Envoys ~o the
various shrines to pray for rain.
   6th month, 2nd day. Criminals were pardoned.
   6th day. An Imperial order was made that Sutras should
be read in the temples of the Home provinces.
   15th day. Persons of the fifth and lo\ver ranks were sent to
cleanse out the temples of the capital.
   19th day. Offerings were distributed to the Gods of Heaven
and Earth."
   26th day. The Ministers and public functionaries began to
make votive images of Buddha for the sake of the Empress's
illness.
   28th day. Daibu were sent as Envoys to visit the various
shrines and pray for rain.
   Autumn, 7th month, 7th day. At midnight, one hundred
anti nine habitual a thieves were pardoned, and four pieces of
cloth given to each. But those from the outer provinces received
twenty sheaves of rice each.
   12th day. Envoys were sent to pray to Hirose and Tatsuta.
   29th day. The Ministers and public functionaries prepared

    1 l'he recognition in this capacity of Prince Aru, grandson of TenlnlU

Tenno and son of the Prince Ilnperial Kusak.abe, after\vards Monunu Tenno,
on the sixteenth day of this lnonth, is recorded by other authors, but is some-
how olnitted in the " Nihon~i."
   :1 'rhe Heir-Apparcnfs Palace.
  3 The Heir-Apparent's Palace.                        4 Shint(J.

  a There is probably sOluething wrong \vith the text here. The" Shukai "
offers an eluendation which would Inean "thieves \vho habitually \vore the
cangue.'
                                   JITO.                            43°
a festival for the installation 1 of Buddhist images in the Temple
of Yakushiji.
   8th month, 1st day. The Empress/ having decided on this xxx 4(.
measure in the forbidden precinct, abdicated the Imperial
Dignity in favour of the Prince Imperial.
  1 Lit. opening the eyes.
  2 She died five years later. Her body was cremated, the first instance of
the application of this Indian practice to a Japanese sovereign.




                               THE END.
This page intentionally left blank
                  ERRATA ET ADDENDA.

                                   VOL. I.

Page 2, line 3. For' drawn out' read' diffused.'
  " 4. The character Jf is sOlnetimes transliterated no and sometimes
             nu-a confusion common with the Japanese themselves.
  " 5, I. IS. For' it had' read' \vhich has.'
  " 6, note 2. For Dho-to nochi Florenz plausibly suggests Oho-tono-ji,
             i. e. ' the elder of the august palace.'
        note 3. Omotaru. Better' face· perfect.'
        note 3. Florenz sug-gests \vith great probability that awo IS here
             only an interjection like aya.
        last line of notes. For' Jirja ' read' Jinja.'
  " 8, line 14 from bottoln. For' place' better' female.'
  " 9, 1. I I. For' galne' read' gane.'
     10, note.       For' first jewel' read' lucky jewel.'
  " 14, I. 14. For' Chi-iwo-aki' read' Chi-i-ho-aki.'
        near bottonl. For' has a place,' etc., read 'is completely formed
             and has a place called.'
  " 15, near bottom. Read' To think of the words of the woman having
             been spoken first! '
  " 18, near bottom of text. For' ladder' read' pillar.'
  " 23, I. 15, 18. For' suchi' read' dzuchi.'
          l. 29. Omit' no Kanli' after' Kura 0 Kami.'
         note 4. Read' in error for yase, having many reaches.'
  " :24, 1. 7. For' Izanami ' read' Izanagi.'
  " 26, I. 3 from bottom. r-'or' I will wash' read ' So he washed.'
  " 27, 1. 14. For' Soko' read' Dha.'
  " 3 1, note 7. N a is here probably for no, the genitive particle.
  " 40, line 5 from bottoln. For' when the seed,' etc., read 'in spring
             sowed seed over again, and broke down,' etc.
  " 4 2 , add to note 2 : - ' Here and at p. 186 the Eternal Land is probably
             the continent of Asia. The cock is called Kuda-kake in the " Ise-
              Monogatari " (Mabuchi's Edition II. 44), where Mabuchi explains
              Kuda as put for Kudara, the name of a Corean kingdonl.'
  " 47, I. 24. For' drew herself up,' etc., read' felt ill all over.'
         near bottom, add note :-' This is the literal translation, but, as we
             learn from the "Shiki,J' the " cOlnbs ~, here mentioned were really
43°                    ERRATA ET ADDENDA.

             Sakaki branches stuck in the ground with tree-fibre hung froln
             thenl as offerings.'
Page 48,1. 12, 13. :For 'he' read 'were.'
  " 49, 1. 12. For' Ono-kori-dome' read' Ishi-kori-dome.'
  " 5I, 1. 16 and 21. Transpose' right' and' left' in these lines.
  " 55, 1. 10, 14. J:t"'or' Mitsu ' read' Mi.'
         1. 13. After' yashinla' add 'de,' and at the end of note 5 the
             word' hand.'
  " 56, 1. 20. For' Ina' read' l\la.'
  " 57, 1. 18 et seqq. For' Iso' read' I:
  " 60, 1. 4. Read' can we say,' etc.
  " 64, 1. 8. For' hoho ninigi ' read' ho no ninigi.'
  " 66, 1. 16. 'The sparrows,' etc., should not be indented.
  " 67, 1. 6. Omit' parents.'
          1. 9. Better' abhor mistaking.'
  " 69, note 5. Mars and Jupiter are also mentioned.
  " 71,1.4. Read' Oho-yama tsu mi no Kami.'
          note 4. After' muro ' insert' except in COlllpositiol1.'
  " 72, add to note :-' Blackmore, in " Lorna Doone," mentions a practice
             in the West of England" of keeping all rooms underground. We
             say that thus we keep them warnler, both {or cattle and men in
             the time of winter, and cooler in the summer time." ,
  " 74, 1. 22. Read' the coffined corpse.'
  " 81, 1. 13. For' loyal behaviour' read' extreme loyalty.'
          I. 6 from bottom. Before' Ma-hitotsu ' insert' Anle no.'
  " 83, 1. I I. After' attendance' add' in the hall.'
  " 85, 1. 10. Read' No\v I suspect that it is not my child.'
  " 89, 1. 23. Read' Chichi hinle no l\likoto, daughter of Honohata hime,
             daughter of,' etc.
          1. 6 from bottom. Add' AUla no' before ' Kaguyama.'
          last line but one et seqq. For • she' read' he.'
  " 91, 1. 19. Read' Tama-yori hilne no l\likoto, child of Yorodzu hata
             hime, child of Taka mimusubi no Mikoto.'
          1. 24. Read' Kachi-haya-bi.'
         I. 26. Add' Hono' before' Ninigi.'
  " 93, I. I. Before' Hoho-demi ' add' Hiko.'
  " 95,1.4 from bottom. After 'acquired' insert' a sea-gift while the
              younger brother Hiko-hoho.. demi no l\Iikoto had acquired.'
  " 96, margin. For' 32 ' read' 37.'
          1. 3. Onlit' Cassia.'
  " 97, 1. 7. j4-'ilth of earth. The hUD1an body is meant. A Buddhist
              idea.
  "  100, note. There are earlier mentions of the Hayato, but their institu-
              tion as an In1perial guard probably belongs to the latter end of
              the seventh century. There are nunlerous indications that this
              legend is of recent date.
  n   10 3, l. 16    For C IIi' read" Ho.
                          ERI{ATA ET i\.I)DENDA.                              43°
Page 104, 1. 18.         For' bathing wOlnen' read '\vdnn-drink-wolnen,' and for
                , washer\voman ' read' bathing-\VOnlan.'
  "    106, 1. 8. After' dais' add' and invited him to come in.'
  "    107, 1. 3. For' teach it to me' read' save ine therewith.'
  "    10<). After the Chinese characters insert' or Tenno.'
  "    110, 1. 12.      For' pointing to ' read' including all.'
            add to note :-' The legend related at p. 128 is an additional indica-
                tion of an earlier settlement of Yanlato by elnigrants from the
                 West. ,The" Kiujiki " states that Nigi-hayahi descended from
                Heaven in Kahachi, and subsequently removed to Yamato.'
       I I I, line 2 from bottOlU. Read' and causing him to take it, pulled
                him,' etc.
            1. 2 I. Read' ships and oars' instead of ' hehns of his ships.'
            1. 6. For' Kafuchi ' here and elsewhere read' Kahachi.'
  "    113, I. I I. After' Ikonla ' read' and in this way to enter,' etc.
  "    I IS, 1. 7.     For' chastise' read 'reduce.'
            1. 8. For' I can' read' and,' and onlit ' upon which' in next line.
            1. 8 from bottom. Read' the Ernperor's army.'
            1. 4 froll1 bottom. For' wandered about' read 'were stayed and
                knew not whither,' etc.
  "    116, 1. 9. After' body' insert' opened out a way across the mountains
                and.'
  "    118, 1. 2. For' they' read' he.'
            last line. No ko, 'the child of,' should be taken as part of the
                name, viz. Iha-oshi \vake no ko. Siulilar]y Nihe-nl0tsu no ko a
                few lines further do\vn.
  "    119, 1. 12. By 'force of 111en,' , arnlY of women,' is probably intended
                 only "'irile or strong troops and effeminate or weak troops.
  "     120, 1. 18. After grass add' rain coat and.'
             1. 24. Read' whether or not I shall be successful in founding the
                Empire.'
  "    121,1. 19. Read after 'river' ~Their lllouths turned downward and
                after,' etc.
  "    122.       I n the poetry repeat the line 'Like the Shitadami' after ~ my
                boys.'
  "    123. In the poetry add after' stay'-

                             'Though Inen in plenty
                              Coming enter and stay.'
           1. 13. Read' I \vill stand up and sing.'
           The sarrle correction in 1. 16.
       12 4.   Transpose the two POClllS on this pagc.
  "        1. 2 from bOttOITl. }{ead' ten and 1110re.'
       125, 1. 20. Add' thus t before' cried.'
  "    126, 1. IS. Better' were not without weariness ,-
           After first line of poetry insert the line, 'With shields in a row.'
  ,.   r 27. Transpose the poelns.
43°                     ERRATA ET ADDENDA.

Page 129,1. 4. For 'Tada' read' Hata.'
         1. 5. The Japanese have indifferently hafuri or hofuri. Hafuri is
             the proper spelling, hofuri being meant to represent the contracted
              form.hori.
  "  J 30, 1. 9. After' Katsuraki ' read' Now thee ancient name of the land of
             Ihare was Kataru or I(atatachi.'
  " 131, note 6. For' evergreen' read' deciduous.'
  " 133, 1. 6. Better read 'to use allusive verses and topsy-turvy words
             so as,' etc.
  " 134, l. 6. For' Katsurano' read' Kadono.'
 " 138,1. 2. Omit' Hohodemi.'
         1. 3. Add' hinle ' after' ISUZll.'
         1. 10. For' Kama' read' Kami.'
  " 14 2, 1. 9. Before' daughter' insert' Howi-hime.'
  " 148, 1. 6. After' Emperor's' insert' younger.'
         1. 10. After' A wotama ' insert' Kake.'
         1. I I. After' yasu ' add' hiko.'
         1. 6 fronl bottom. 'Ancestor of the Hodzumi no Olni ' should come
             in at the end of the sentence.
  " 150, 1. 8. For' of wide culture' read' broad-lninded.'
         I. 5 from bottom. Read' daughter of the Tohe of Araka (or Ara-
            kaha) in the land of Ki.'
         l. 4 from bottom. Add after' had' , Toyo-ki-iri-hiko.' Omit period
            after' Oho-aula.'
 " 152, 1. 6 from bottom. Read' Is not this non-acceptance cruel?'
 " 153, 1. 4 from bottom. Add after 'Shiko-wo' 'the ancestor of the
            Mononobe no Muraji.'
  " 161, 1. 2. Read' Fanlilies were well supplied.'
  " 164, note 2. Read' in Japanese Keirin.'
  " 168. Read' Judging fronl the implements which this ox is carrying,
             he is surely intended to be killed and eaten.'
  " 172, 1. 2. For' slay' read' attack.'
 " 178, 1. 9. After' land' read' and that I should personally conduct the
             government of the great earth. The covenant was already
            completed. But although,' etc.
         I. 22. For' Kuka ' read' Fukayu.'
 " 181, last t,vo lines. Read' If I am to be united to this beautiful person
             I shall surely see a happy onlen on the way.'
 " 182, last line. Read' Then he said to the courtiers.'
 " 183, 1. 5. After' '[ohe ' insert' of Yamashiro.'
 " 189, last line. For' gore ' read' gokoro.'
 " 191, 1. 1 and 2. For' ~oro' read' gokoro.'
 " 193, L 4. ~""or' hard' read' sakaki.'
 " 194, 1. 21. Onlit' muro.'
 " 195, 1. 6 from bottonl. For' It will be,' etc., read' Their spear points
            are not to be matched,' and omit' For.'
 " 196, 1. 27. For' Ki ' read' Hi.'
                          ERRATA ET l\!JIJE'NDA.                          43°
Page 197, 1. 18. For' to' read' through.'
             1. 9 from bottom. For' people' read ' their tri be.'
  " 206, 1. 8 from bottom. Add note, 'i.e. a Deity incarnate In human
              form.'
  " 208, 1. 8. For' Mount Ohoyama ' read' the great Inountains.'
  "  20<), l. 17.    Read' Hut he got up \\'ith difficulty and returned,' etc.
  " 22 I, 1. 5 from bottom. 'Dazzling to the ey~s is better construed with
                                                     I



              'gold and silver,' etc.
  " 224, J. 5 and 10. Read' Tarashi-nakatsu hiko.'
  " 225, 1. I. W oyan1ada.
  " 226, l. 19. For' powerful fralue ' read '~tubborn nature.'
          l. 24. For returned' read' rem(Jved.'
                     It


  " 228, 1. 22. For' take possc;;sion of' read' seek.'
  '" 237, 1. 7. For' So on a later day,' etc., rcall 'Again they said "Bring
              a lute and give it to the Enlpress." ,
          note 7. lVlikokoro is a Inakura-kotoba of Hirota.
          1. 8. Read' What ill-sounding thiugs the wonlan says! '
  " 239, 1. 3. For' Katsurano' read' Kadono:
          1. 14-17. Read-
                              , Noble with nobles,
                                Cousin \vith cousins.'

  "    240, 1. 19. For' Midzunoto,' etc., read ' Kanoto M i ' (18th).
  "    242, 1. 3. For' Emperor' read' Grand Elnpress.'
  "    246, 1. 8. Read' In the course of the seventh month of,' etc.
  "    248, I. 5. After' tribute' add' which they made the tribute of their
               own country.'
           1. 6. After' Silla ' add' mean articles.'
  "    250, 1. 12 from bottom. For' Corea' read' Pekche.'
       25 I, 1. 16. Read' It is so distant that it cannot be reached 10 seven
               days' journey.'
  "     254, 1. 13.     Read' This agreed \vith the elbow-pad \vorn by the
               Elnpress as a luanly accoutreluent.'
   "    255,1. I. For' 'fsutsuhi' read' Kebi.'
           1. 15. For' younger' read' elder.'
            1. I 1 from bottom. For' Prince' read' Princess.'
            l. 7 from hottOlU. For' Mago' read' Ito.'
   "    257, L 7. For' Kadzu' read 'Kadono.' Chiba,' thousand leaves/
               is a makura-kotoba of Kadono, Kado (or Kadzura) meaning a
               creeper.
            1. 5) and in p. 258. After· U mashi ' add' uchi.'
   "    259, 1. I. After' Tsurugi ' add • Karu.'
            1. 19. For' the upper' read' a.'
   "    260, 1. 5 of poetry. ' River fork' is perhaps better 'Kahanlata,' the
               name of a river.
   "    264, 1. 10 from bottoln. For' kebi ' better read' mOlni.'
   "    265, note. For ~ read ~.
       VOL. II.                                                   F   f
43°                    ERRATA ET ADDENDA.

Page 266.   Poetry.   Dr. Florenz interprets the last three lines as follows-
                      , Yield to one side
                        (In order that) I may see
                        My departing spouse of Kibi.'
 "  267. For' Ahiru' read' Kamo.'
 "  271, I. 12. For' Oho-kuma ' read' Oho-sunli.'
 "  276. For' sent it ' read' went.'
 "  277, 1. 6. For' my abdication' read' his self-abnegation.
         note. Read' Chihaya-bito.'
 " 278, 1. 8 from bottom. Read' But for the three years that We have
          now reigned over the people,' etc.
 " 279, 1. 3. Read' no robes of state or shoes were made for hiln except
          \vhen worn out.'
       1. 5. Read after 'broths' '\vere not renewed except when they
          became sour or putrid.'
 " 284. Poetry. For first two lines read-
                        , By the rule established
                          For nobles.J
  " 293, 1. 5 from bottom. For' Empress' read' Emperor.'
  " 294, 1. 21. For' Taka-ama' better' Taka-kahi ' (falcon·feed).
  " 298, 1. 6. For' melts' read 'is distributed.'
 " 304, 1. 4. For' Furu no ' read' Furu in.'
 " 3°5, 1. 4. Before' Hayato ' insert' an attendant.'
 " 322, note I. ' N a-nori-ahi ' should be 'na-nori-so,' 'tell it not.'
 " 323, 1. 6. Read' But the sea was deep and they,' etc.
 " 326, 1. 3 from bottom. For' made them go back' read' returned.
 " 329, 1. 3 from bottom. Read' one whit disagreeable.'
 " 335. Poetry. For' nine-fold' read' seven-fold.'
 " 336, 1. 4 from bottom. Omit' a place belonging to.'
        note 3. Add' Fukuro probably means mother here.'
 " 338, 1. 4. Before' woman' insert 'man and.'
         Last line but one, read 'they \vere' for' she was.'
 " 340, last line. Read' The only persons whom he favoured.'
 " 341, 1. 7. After Princess add' and has made her pregnant.'
 " 34 2 ,1. 12. After' flying) add' and bit the Emperor's elbow.'
 " 349, 1. 17. For' get instructions' read' proceed by way of.~
 " 35 1, note 2. For' Bekkako' read' Kokkeko' or 'Kakero.'
 " 359, 1. 26. For' Autumn' read' Winter.'
 " 362,1. 15. Read' How nearly I had destroyed the man!'
 " 366, 1. 14. For' beside himself with shanle' read' for shame at his
           unsuccess.'
       1. 7 fron1 bottom. For' who' read' and.'
 " 369, note 2. Better to take slnoke and fire as signs of plenty, which
          extend for 10,000 rio
 " 370, 1. 5. Read' How should not we, with our whole" hearts, address
          thenl decrees of cordial warning?'
                            ERRATA. ET ADDENI)A..                         4 .)"1
Page 370, 1. 20. Read' many years have no\v passed, and it (my death)
           cannot be called premature.'
        I. 5 from bottom. Read' should gain his purpose of unit;ng,' etc.
  " 3il, 1. 3~ 4. Read' The 5erfs of the OhOlTIUrajj are \vide.spread,' etc.
        1. 14. Read Your serfs are very nUlnerous.'
                       I;


        1. 16. Read' Is it not better to keep safe our persons and avoid
           risk rather than by such an announcement to bring on ourselves
           ruin ?'
  " 386, 1. 10. After Dignity read' to the great delight of the functionaries
           who were in attendance.'
  " 390, 1. I I from bottom. Read' There are no words "'ithout response:
           no virtuous action v.'ithout requitaL'
        1. 8 from bottom. For' feasts' read' has obtained.'
  " 399, 1. 3. Read' Oho-iratsume.
  " 400, note 3. For' 13' read' J 2.'


                                   'iOL. I I.
Page 13. Omit note I.
  " 19, note 5. For' Eungchon ' read' Ungchon.'
  "   20, I. 5- For' Eunchol ' read' Eunsol.'
  ,.. 127, note 5. Omit' In modern times,' etc.
  " 148. Add to note 2 : - ' The authenticity of the 'I Kiujiki " ,vas never
             disputed until the time of Motoori and Hirata. The former
             (" Kojikiden " i. 20) condemns it as a forgery. He says, ho\vever,
             that it is not a mere invention, but compiled from the" Kojiki" and
             "Nihongi." If anyone doubts this let him, Motoori says, read the
           " Age of the (;'ods," comparing- the accounts given in the three
          works. He will find in the" Kiujiki " an incongruous mixture of
          style, and also that the same event has been narrated in t\VO
          different forms. The difference in the Chinese characters used for
          writing the same proper names is especially conspicuous. Some-
          times the" Kog(ljiui "has been resorted to, and such passages
          are easily distinguished as they are copied word for \vord. There
          are, ho\vever, passages not to be found elsewhere, probably taken
          from some old \\'ork, and the MSS. are useful for correcting the
          text of the "Nihongi." To these observations of Motoori it
          may be added that the "Kiujiki" contains an account of the
          dt=ath of Shotoku Daishi, its supposed author, which luust have
          been added a long time after (probably from the" Nihongi "), as
          it has the expression" the men of that day." We should also
          ien1ember the positive statement of the " Nihon~i" (p. 193) that
          the greater part of the "Kiujiki" was destroyed by fire in
          A.D. 645-
         Notwithstanding all this, I incline to the opinion that the
          "Kiujiki," \\,ith the exception of the final passage which relates
          the death of Shotoku Daishi, is authentic. Motoorl hardly
43 2                    ERRATA ET ADDENDA.

          does justice to the amount of original Blatter in the nlythological
          chapters, and the similarities between it and the " Kojiki" and
          " Nihongi;' may be accounted for by supposing that all three
          drew their materials from a common stock, viz. the recitals of the
          " Kataribe" and the written documents cOlnpiled from them. It
          is quite true that the " Kiujiki " gives in many cases two versions
          of the same legend, but the clumsiness with \vhich they have
          been dovetailed together is rather a proof that the writer could
          not have had the more consistent narrative of the" Nihongi "
          before him. This part ought to be translated. It contains
          nlaterial which is necessary {or a conlplete study of Shintoisnl.
        From Jilnmu Tenno on the question assumes a different aspect.
           Here either the author of the" Nihongi " has incorporated the
          whole "Kiujiki," or the author of the "Kiujiki" has made a
           selection from the" N ihongi." So far as the fornler goes it is
          identical word for word with the latter. From the circulnstance
          that the additional matter contained in the" Nihongi" is very
           largely of a romantic or poetical nature, it seems more probable
          that the "Kiujiki" is the original work. Its general style is
           eminently consistent with the statement I (" Nlhongi," vol. ii.
           p. 122) that the reputed author \\'as a thorough proficient in
           both Chinese and Buddhist learning.
        Without a more exhaustive examination it is impossible to say
           1110re, but there is, I feel sure, sufficient internal evidence avail-
           able to solve the question \\"ith certainty. It would afford an
          interesting subject of critical inquiry to sOlne of our younger
          students.'
Page 352, 1. 9. For' 11th tread' loth.'
       1. 12. Onlit' you who accepted our rule and also to,' and add at
           end of sentence' of your emigration hither.'

 For most of the above corrections I anl indebted to the kindness of
Dr. Florenz, Professor of Philology in the Inlperial University of Tokio.
                                    INDEX.
AHSTINE:"CE (religious), I. 41, 42, 82,         AnthropOnl0l'phism, I. 41.
  15 2 , 3 16, 32 5, 347; II. 101, 38 7.        Arakahi, II. 2, 8, 15, etc.
Abstinence Palace, I. 176, 225; II. 322,        Arare-bashiri, II. 4 11 , 414.
   326 ,338 .                                   Arashito or Arasateung, I. 166; I L 18,
Acupuncture, II. 190.                               19,23·
Adoption, II. 2.                                Archery, 1. 282, 336, 377 ; II. 226, 393,
Adultery, II. 221.                                 etc.
Adzuma, I. 81, 207.                             •\rima (Prince), II. 251.
Adzuma Kota. I. 225.                            .Arinari (river), I. 231.
.A.gata-nushi, I. 134.                          Arrow. See Nari-kabura, Bo\v, Archery.
Age of the Gods. Books I. and II.               Artizans (from Corea), I. 349, 396, etc.
Agura, II. 103.                                 .Ashihara, I. 40.
.A.haji (island, birth of), I. 13.              Ashinadzuchi, I. 52, 56.
Ahimbe, II. 335.                                Aso (Mount), I. 198•
Aino or Ainu. See Yernishi.                     Aso or Ason (title), I. 236, 239; II. 365,
Aji-suki-taka-hiko-ne, 1. 67, 75.                  etc.
Akakagachi, J. 77.                              ;\.stronomy, II. 76, 126, 3°1, 326. See
Akitsushima, 1. 13, 134, 343; II. 12, 66.          also Comet, Eclipse, Occultation, ~Iars,
Aloes wood, II. 123.                               Pleiades.
Altar, I. 353.                                  Ass, II. 252.
Ama or Arne, heaven. pasSt'lIl.                 Atahe or .l\tahi (title), I. 36.
Ama no hihoko, 1. 169, 185, 186.                Ataka-ashi tsu hiu1e, 1. 88.
AIna no Nunahara oki no :\labito, II.           Aya. I. 26 5, 270, 336, 350, 363; II. 118,
  3°'·                                             190, 192, etc.
. .\ma no mi-nalca-nushi, I. 5.                 Augury. See Divination.
Alna terasu no Ohokami.           See   ~un-    Axe, I. 301 ; II. 14, 73, 420.
  godde~s.
 l\nla tsu mara. See Smith-god.                 BALD~ ESS    as an incapacity for service of
 j\mbassadors (should be of good falnily),        gods, I. 152.
    11·79·                                      Hanishlllent. II. 333, 339.
 Arne (lnalt extract), I. 121.                  Banzai or Hansai, 1. 389; II. (75, 41 I.
 Ame-kuni-oshi-harani-hiro-niha, II. 5, 36.     Baptismal flag, II. 149.
 Arne mikoto hirakasu wake. II. 275.            Be, I. 43, 47, 104, 139, 175, 280, 3°7,
 Anle no oshi-ho-mimi no l\fikoto, 1. 83.         3 14. 32 2, 340, 350, 359. 36 5, 375 ; II.
 Arne no Uzume. See Uzume.                        4, 27, 3 1, 95, 12 5, 12 9, 224. See also
 Ame-toyo-takara ikashihi tarashi hime, I.        Nasbiro.
    17 1, 248.                                  Beacons, II. 13.
 Ame~waka-hi\co, I. 65.                         Hear (polar), II. 257, 263, 371.
 Ame-yorodzu toyohi, II. 195.                   Bed of absent person, Superstition regard-
 Amnesty, II. 322, and frequently after this.     ing, I. 325.
 Anaho, I. 328.                                 Bees, II. 184.
Anahobe (Prince), 11.107,112.                   Bellows, I. 47.
 Anato, I. 167.                                 Hells, 1. 286, 294. 301 , 32 9, 34S, 387;
 Ancestor-worship, I. 27 ; II. 3S I.              II. 86, 10 5, 167, 201, 206, 21 I, 227,
_t\ngo. See Retreat.                              302 , 335·
.A.nkan Tellllo, II. 12, 26.                    Bhechadjya H.adja. See Yakushi.
Anko Tenno, I. 328, 33z.                        Hidatsu (or Bindatsu) Tenno, II. 90-1 0 5.
.A.nnei Tenno, I. 141, 142.                     Bosatsu (or Bodhisattwa), II. 1 I I, 175•
434                                       INDEX.

Bo\v and ,arrows, I. 34, 37, 139, 247, etc.       Combs, superstitions regarding, 1. 24, 25,.
Box for petitions, II.. 21 I.                       47, 48 , 52, 96, 98 ; II. 4 25.
Bralnblings (bird), II. 339, 349.                 Comets, II. 166, 167, 169, 333, 353, 364,
Branding of criminals, etc., I. 30 5, 307,          367.
  359·                                            Compass (mariner's), II. 258, 285.
Bronze, II. 41 S.                                 Concubines (Imperial), 1. 31 I, etc.
Buddhism, I. 219; II. 59, 65, 6o, 68, 72,         Confiscation, I. 293 ; II. 83.
  78, 90, 96, 101, and frequently during          Confucius, II. 129.
  the remainder of Vol. II. See also              Consecration (of Buddhist inlages), I I. 297,
  Hoshi, Image, Kesa, Nuns, Shaluon,                4 2 3.
  Sutra, Sodzu, Kwannon, Telnples, Re-            Conundrums, II. 374, 375.
  treat.                                          Copper, I. 20, 47, 120, 220, 221, 328,
Buffalo, II. 297.                                   350, 355; 11.65, 86, 133, 360, 38 7,4 1 5.
Butsudan, II. 369.                                Corea, Introduction xi. See I-Ian, Ilnna,.
                                                    Kara, Koryo, Pekche, Silla.
                                                  Corean deities worshipped in Japan, I. 1 I,.
CALENDAR, Introduction xvii.; II. 68, 72,           169, 225, 37 8 .
   126, 400.                                      Corean names, Introduction xxii.; I. 244.
Camel, II. 124, 146, 25 2 •                       Cormorant-tishing, I. 119, 126, 341.
Cap-rank, II. 127, 228, ~31, 281, 370.            Cosmogony, I. 2, et seqq.
   See also Rank.                                 Costume, II. 18, 30 4, 30 7, 397, 410.
-Cash, II. 34, 414.                               Court, II. 138.
Castles, building of, II. 283, et seqq., 286.     Crelnation, II. 423.
Cattle-breeding, II. 32.                          Crow, three-legged. See Yatagarasu.
Caterpillar, worship of, II. ISS, et seqq.        Currency, 1. 89, 39 1 ; II. 34, 222, 36o,
Celestial dog, II. 167.                             37 2 , 4 1 4.
Censorate, II. 294.                               Curses, I. 249, 337, 4°3; II. 102.
Ceremonies, court, II. 227, 357, 398, etc.        Cycle, Chinese, I. 111.
Chair, II. 102.
 Chaos, 1. I.                                     DAIBU, I. 175; II. 98.
Charms, I. 94; II. 82, 373. See also              Daijin, I. 334; II. 196.
   Incantation, Mantras.                          Daijinno, II. 114.
Chesyang, I. 243.                                 Daijoye, I. 86.
Chhimnyu (King), I. 253.                          Daikoku, I. 55, 63.
 Chi or chichi, 1. 4, 264.                        Dainagon, II. 347.
Chigi, I. 132.                                    Da'i Nippon, II. 279.
 Childbirth, superstitions connected with,        Dajodaijin, II. 294.
   I. 85, 98, 103, 104.                           Dakiu, II. 185.
 China, relations with, Introduction xi. j II.    Dancing (religious), I. 44, 79; (other),3 18,
   138. See Thang, Wu, Tsin, Han.                   381, 382, etc.
 Chinese civilization, spread of, II. 133.        Dazaifu, II. 139.
 Chinese customs, I. 31 I.                        Debts discharged, II. 378, 38 5.
 Chinese learning, first introduction of, I.      Deer, cry of, I. 289.
   262.                                           Deer, dreanl of, I. 290.
(~hiuai Tenno, I. 217-223.                        Deification of Emperors, II. 226, 227.
Cho (land measure), II. 208.                        See also Incarnation.
Chopstick, I. 159.                                Departments of State, II. 232.
Choshushi, II. 213, 225.                          Distribution of lands to peasants. See
Chronology, Introduction xvi.; I. III, 132,         Kobunden.
   14 1, 153, 165, 177, 2 0 5, 247, 256, 262,     Divination, I. 83, 107, 121, 15 2 , 153,
   293, 300 , 30 7. 330, 332 , 346 , 36 6 ; II.     176, 177, 178, 189, 195, 227, 228, 229,
   25, 37. See also Calendar, Nengo..               237, 281, 290, 30 7, 32 4, 355; II. 59,
Circunlambulation, II. 259.                         68, 72, 95, 102, 257, 306. See also
Clapping hands by ,yay of respect, II. 395.         ()mens.
Clay figures at tombs, I. 181, 357.               Divorce, I. 25, 30.
Clay-\vorkers, I. 180, 356. See also              Dog-keepers, II. 32.
   IIashi.                                        Dog stories, II. 116.117.
Clepsydra, II. 265. 296.                          Dragon, II. 240, 248.
Cloth, 1. 44; II. 180, 208.                       Dragon-fly, 1. 134, 34 2 •
C~lolld-chariot, II. 275.                         Dragon-king, 1. 61, 95.
Cock, I. 42 ; II. 425.                            Dreams, I. 115, 15 2, 155, 161, 165, 290 ;
Cock-fighting, 1. 348.                               II. 36.
Coin, I. 391 ; II. 304. See also Copper,          Dwarf -god. See Sukuna-bikona.
   Currency.                                      Dwarfs, I I. 295.
                                          INDEX.                                        435
EARTH-GODDESS, birth of, I. 21, 22.              Genealogy of the Gods, I. 4- 10.
Earthquakes, I. 317 ; II. 124, 176, 282,         Geonlancy, II. 76, 126, 387.
  330, 33 6 , 339, 343, 344, 348 , 35 1 , 353,   Giogi-yaki (pottery), 1. 12I.
  354, 35 6 , 357, 36 5, 373, 375, 384.          Go (part of China), I. 269. See also
Eclipses, II. 155, 167, 168, li9, 348 , 349,       vYu.
  353, 40 4, 41 I, 4 1 3, 4 14, 4[7, 420.        Godzu Tenno, I. 19.
Edicts, II. 82, et tassi,Jl.                     Gohei, I. 44. See Offerjng~.
Eight, significance of this number,!. 52;        Gokinai, I. 135, 159, 2 I 5, 228; II. 207,
  II. 143.                                         4 0 7.
Eight-island-land, I. 16; II. 10.                Gold, II. 34, 65, 86, 134, 149, f 72, etc.
Embroidery, II. 133.                             Gold-copper, II. 39 1 , 393.
Empress Dowager, I. 140.                         C;overnors of provinces, II. 131, 200, etc.
Enclosure for Shinto worship, I. 82, 134.        Grain, origin of, I. 21.
Eta, I. 338.                                     Granaries (official), I. 214, 282. See
Eternal Land. See Tokoyo.                          ~liyake.
Ethnology, I. 109, 212; II. 38, 123.             Great Abstinence Deity.     See Oho-imi.
  See also Immigration, !(oma, l(umaso,
  Tsuchi~umo, y"'" emishi.                       HACHIMAN, I. 271.
'Eunsol (Corean title), II. 20, 98.              Hachi-oji (eight Princes), I. 36.
Expiation. See Purgation.                        Hada (noble House), I. 265, 364; II. 39.
                                                 Hades. See Vomi, Ne no Kuni.
FALCOS      (for hunting), I. 291, 294; II.      IIafuri (Shinto priests), I. 56, 1 2 9, 307 ;
  239·                                              II. 39, 82, 174, 428 .
Family relations. See l\Iarriage, Incest,        Hair ornaments (sign of rank), II. 128,
  Harakara.                                         138, 142 , 230.
Famine,!. 87 ; II. 155t 167.                     Haka (tomb), I. 159. See Tomb.
Fa~t~, II. 402. See also Abstinence.             Hakama (prisoner in China), II. 400.
FestIval:i.     See Shinj6sai, Nihiname,         H akase (doctor), 11. 197.
  Ahimbe.                                        Hakuchi, year-period of, II. 236.
Fetish. See Caterpillar, Stone-\vorship.         Han (Corea), I. 58,232,242,254,257,263,
Ft=udalism, I. 192, 267; II. 197, 206, 4°1,         2i3, 349; I r. 35· 38 .
  etc.                                           Han (China), 1.265, 270; II. 118.
Fine. See Purgation.                             Hand-mill, I. 189; I I. 140.
Fire, ordeal by, I. 89.                          Jlangwan (officials), II. 200.
Fire-driB, I. 205.                               Hanishi, I. 356. See Hashi 110 Muraji.
Fire-god, I. 21, 28, 29, 122.                    IIanhva, I. 18r.
Fnewood presented to Enlperor, II. 326,          I-Ianzei Tenno, 1. 310.
   330, etc.                                     Harahe, 1. 49; II. 221 t 333, 338. See
Firn13ment, I. 291.                                 Purgation, Oho-harahe.
Fish-hooks (of iron), I. 92.                     Harakara, I. 143. 3 22 , 3 2 3.
Five grains, I. 2 J, 278.                        IIashi no Muraji, I. 36,~ 181, 365; II.
Flute, II. 1 I, 24.                                126.
Folk-lore, I. 307.                           Hashira, 1. 3.
Food-goddess, I. 22, 32. 122.                Hatahi (Princess). 1. 330.
Football, II. 185.                           Hatsuse (Prince), II. 161.
Forced labour, ~. 278, ft passiln.           I-Iayabusa wake (Prince), 1. 390, et seqq.
:Four Heavenly King.;, II. 114, 1 15.        Hayato (palace guards), I. 100, 305, 375,.
Fujihara family, II. 291.                       377; II. 38 , 249, 35 6, 390, 4 18 , 426 .
Fumibito or Fuhito (stribes), Introduction   Hawking. See Falcon.
   xii.; I. 263; II. 91.                     Herbalists, I I 72.
Funeral ceremonies, 1. 66, 67, 326; II.      Herb-gathering, II. 141, 143, 145, 288.
   24, 104, 143. 173, 177, 23 2 , 274, 303,  Herb of long hfe. II. 186, 344.
   360, 380, 3~8.                            Hi, land of, I. 191. 198.
Funeral ~acrifices, I. 178.                  Hiki (piec~ of cloth), II. 209.
Funado no Kami, I. 25.                       Hilne (lady), frequently in names of prin-
Furubito (Prince). See Yoshino.                 cesses, etc.
F'utodama no Mikoto, I. 82, etc              Hire (scarf). II. 355.
Futsu-nushi no Kami, I. 23, 67.              Hiuga, I. 196.
                                             Home provinces. See Gokinai.
(.iAGS, II. 313.                             Hoshi (priestly title), II. 118, 197.
Gambling, II. 37 I.                          Hostages, II. 196, 226.
Games. See Suguroku, Dakiu.                  Huto, II. 153· 203.
Garlic as a charm against evil spirits, I.   House (noble), 1. 316.
   208.                                    I Hsiian-ts'ang, II. 254.
437                                           INDEX.

                                                     Itsukushima, 1. 35.
ICE-HOUSE, I. 297.                                   Itsuse no Mikoto, I. 113, 127.
Ichinobe no Oshiwa, I. 336, 378.                     Izahowake, I. 301.
Idols, I. 3. See I mages.                            Izanami and Izanagi (Creator deities), I.
Iuzu, I. 70, 122, 176.                                  6-34, passl11t, also 1. 30 7, 322.
Idzube. See Sacred jars.
1<1zuhime, I. 122.                                   JAPAN, names of.       See Nippon, Yamato,
Idzuki, I. 291.                                         A kitsu, \Va, Ashihara, Eight-island-
Idzumo, I. 52, 54, log, 38 1.                           land.
Idzushi sword, I. 168. 169, 185.                     Jewel-spear of Heaven, I. II.
Ihanagahime, 1. 84.                                  Ji or chi (elder) . I. 4, 18.
Ihawi, II. 15.                                       Jimnlu Tenno, I. 62, 1°9-137; II. 21.
Ihaya, I. 72 •                                       Jingikwall (department of Shinto religion),
Ihitoyo (Princess), I. 383.                             Eight gods of, I. 7.
lkadzllchi, I. 347.                                  Jingo Kogu, 1.224-253.
Ike (a pond), I. 149. See Irrigation.                Jito Tenno, II. 382-423.
Ikina, 11. 84.                                       Jomei Tenno, II. 95-157.
Ikuhi, I. ] 54.                                      Junshi (self-sacrifice at tomb of a lord or
Ikume-iri-hiko isachi, 1. 161, 163, 165.                husband), I. 180, 331; II. 183. 220,
IlIa (Corean statesman), II. 97, et seqq.               234,383.
Inlages (Buddhist), II. 65, 67, 98, 101,             Jupiter (planet), II. 409.
   III, 127,133, 150, 230, 24°,3 8 7,39 1 ,
   4 22 .                                            KABAr\ E (title), I. 27.
Imaki, 1. 349, 350.                                  Kachaya. See Kesa.
In1i (avoidance of religious in1purity), I.          Kagase-\vo (star-god), I. 69, 79.
   4 1•                                              I{agehirne, I. 402.
Imibe (or Imbe), I. 4 2 , 45,47.                     Kagllra. See Dancillg.
Imiki (title), II. 365.                              Kagutsuchi. See Fire-god.
Immigration to Japan, I. 166, 169, 24 2,             ]{aguyalna (mount), I. 43, 119, 120.
   261, 264, 26 5, 296, 359; II. 38 , 83, 86,        Kaha (river). frequently in names of places.
   87, 99, 12 3, 126, 139. 140, 144, 146,            I{ahabe no Omi, II. 83.
   273, 28 5, 29 2 , 330, 36 4, 3 84, 38 5, 39 1 ,   Kahachi no Atahe, II. 44, 48.
   397, 398 , 399·                                   ](aikwa Tenno, 1. 148.
Imna.1. 164, 166, 167, 249, 253, 257, 348,           ](akosaka (Prince), 1. 2 6, ft seqq.
   392 ; II. 7, 19, 35, 39, 4 2 , 80, 119, 124,      Kamako no Muraji or Kamatari Ko, II.
  226.                                                  184, 19 1 , 193, 194, 197, 243, 282, 291.
Iroo, younger sister or ",'ife, I. 22, 104,          Kama-shishi, II. 181, 371.
   397·                                              Kami, deity, I. 3.
Imperial theory, II. 29, 30.                         }{ami-ataka-ashi-tsu·hinle, I. 85.
Imun (part of Corea), II. 9, 12.                     Kamibe (or Kambe), 1. 57.
In and Yo, I. I, 4, 12. See also Yin and             }(ami !\1i l\1usubi (deity), I. 5, 9.
  Yang.                                              Kami-naga-hime, J. 259.
Inaki, I. 172, 21 5, 315,364; II. 113, 365.          Kami Nunagaha nlitui. See Suizei.
Inalue no Sukune. II. 66, 78, 87, 112.               Kami yamato Ihare-biko. See Jimlllu.
Incantations, I. 60, 94, 98, 99, 102, 133·           Kami ya-wi nlimi no Mikoto, I. 139.
   See Mantras.                                      Kamo-shika. See Kanla-shishi.
Incarnation, II. 198, 210, 217.                      Kanul-niha, It 353.
Incest, I. 32 4, 396.                                ]{amu tsu nliya See Shotoku Daishi.
Indigo, I. 353.                                      Kanamllra no l\1uraji, 1. 4°4; II. 8.
Ingio Tenno, I. 312.                                 Kana glosses, Introd. xxi.
Ink-cord, I. 362.                                    Kana Nihongi, Introd. xiv.
Inspiration, 1.79, 16 3, 221, 225, 39 1 ,39 2 ;      I(anki (Corean title), I. 166, 231 ; II. 19,
   II. 76, 3 1 7.                                      4 2 ,5 1 •
Interlinear Kana, Introduction xxi.; II.             ]{anro (sweet dew). II. 339.
   200.                                              !{ara, 1. 57, 162, 166, 232, 252, 261, 263;
Inukahi, II. 32.                                       II. 18. See also Imna.
Iron,1. 92.247, 25 1 , 282, 328; II. 14, 86,         Karakane (bronze), II. 415.
   102, 173, 294, 344, 387.                          Karako, 1I. 22.
Irrigation, I. 164, 183, 21 4, 227, 257, 259,        Karano (name of ship), I. 256, 268.
   2~3, 306, 307 ; II. 136 .                         Karu (Prince), 1. 323.
Iruka no Omi. Book xxiv., passim.                    learn (Prince), II. 184, 194.
Ise, I. 44. 17 6, 2 °5,225.                          Kashikiya hinle, I r. 95.
Issaikio, II. 3 22, 330, 337.                        Kasuga (Princess), II. 9.
Itoku Tenno, 1. 142.                                 I{atari be, Introd. xv. ; I. 353.
                                            INDEX.                                         437
Kaya, II. 80. See Ilnna.                           I(uni no satsuchi no ~1 ikoto, I. 3.
Keidai Tenno, II. J -25.                           Kuni toko-tachi no ~1ikoto, I. 3, 4.
Keiko Tenno, I. 18~-214.                           Kure, I. 265, 269, 362. See Go, Wu.
l(ena no Omi, II. 15, 19, etc.                     Kuro hime, 1. 3°1.
Kenzo Tenno, I. 377-393.                           Kusaka no hatahi-hinle, I. 337.
Kesa (Buddhist priest's garment), II. 196,         l(usanagi (sword), I. 52- 58, 76, 205, 2 I I ;
    297,3 86 .                                        II. 290, 377·
Kibi (province), I. 14, 112, 155.                  ](ushi-nada.hime, 1. 52, 56.
l~ibi no Omi, I I. 58.                             Kusuri-ga ri. See Herb-gathering.
Kibumi, i.e. yellow books, II. 133, 185.           Kusyu (King of Pekche), 1. 251.
l,-ilin, I. 164, 244.                              Kuzu (local chiefs), 1. Ilg, 266.
I~imi \lord), 1. 38. et paSS£l1l.                  K\vannon (Buddhist), II. 379,391.
}Zimmei Tenno, JI. 36-89.                          Kyosoku, II. 256.
Kinai. See Gokinai.
Ki no tsuno no Sukune, I. 293.                     LACQUKR, II. 110, 367.
I,-i no woyumi no Sukune, I. 354.                  Laws, II. 128,202,220, 35°,358,393,4°2.
l(ishi (title), I. 236.                            Leaves used as platters,!. 12 5, 2~5.
Kissing, II. 85.                                   Leech-god, I. 15, 18, 19, 20.
l(ite (golden), I. 126.                            Legends, passi", in earlier part of work.
l(iujiki, Introd. xii. i II. 148, 193; Ad-         Leopard as deity, II. 70.
    denda.                                         Living things released, II. 334, 335.
Kiushiu, 1. 109, 112. See Tsukusbi.                Loans of rice, II. 328.
l~oan Tenno, I. 145.                               Local authorities, I I. 206, 207, 213, 2 I 4,
l(obunden, II. 208, 225, 409.                        242, etc.
](ubun Tenno, II. 301,303.                         Long-life places (Buddhist), II. 394, 404.
I~ogen Tenno, 1. 146.                              Loom. See '.Veaving.
l(ogioku Tenno, II. 171-194.                       Lustration, 1. 26.
I(ojiki (history). Introd. xiii. xix.; 1. 2,350,
    393·                                           ~rAGARI NO OHI!\E (Prince), II. 5, 12, 26.
Kokishi (Corean word for king), I. 251.            :\laga-tama (curved jewels), I. 38, 49, 184,
Kokuryo. See Koryo.                                  221.
l(okushi (governor), II. 201.                      f\.Jagic, 1. 157, 361; II. 126, 190, 301.
],-oma, 1. 232; II. 61. See Koryo.                     ~ee Incantation, \Vitchcraft.
l,-onohana sakuya hime, 1. 70.85.                  l\lagpies, II. 124.
J~orei Tenno, I. 146.                              l\lahakala, II. 114.
]~oro-pok.guru, I. 72.                             Maitreya. II. 101, 127.
l,-oryo, or Kokuryo (kingdolll of Corea),          Majinahi, 1. 60.
    I. 231, 262, 268, 282, 296, 351, 366,          ~lakura kotoba, I. 176, 403, etc.
    392 ; II. 38 , 44, 60, 77, 86, 93. 134;        :\Iallet weapons, stone or wood, I. 123,
    downfall of, 289.                                 12 4, 194, 240.
l~oshi, I. 14.                                     :\Ianchus. See Sushen.
]~oshiro, II. 217.     See Nashiro.                :\Iantras, II. 96.
}(osho Tenno, I. 144.                              ~larket commissioners, II. 223.
]~usobo) II. 196.                                  Marriage ceremony, I. 12, 14- 18, 54.
l":'oto (lute), I. 2z5, :268, 269, 35 1, 380;      ~farriage to near relations, 1. 22, 145, 212,
    II. 235.                                          277,290; II. 26, 38, 40, 10 7, 185, 220,
](otoku Tenno, II. 195.                               22 I. See Nuptial hut.
Kotoshiro nushi, I. bI, 76, 225, 237; II.          ~1arriage presents, 1. 301.
    3 18 .                                         Mars (planet), II. 353, 409.
I":'oyane no Mikoto, I. 82, etc.                   Masaya-a- katsu kachi hayathi-ama no oshi
}(udara (kingdom of Corea), I. 232. See               ho mimi, 1. 36, 37, 64, 76.
    Pekche.                                        l\iasu (tneasure of capacity), II 209.
l'-ukunochi. See Tree-god.                         l\Iato, I I. 53.
Kuma, I. 62, 82, 197, 232, 239, 368; II.           l\Iatori no Uhomi, I. 403.
    59. See also Kumaso.                           l\fayuwa (Prince), I. 334.
 ](ulua-himorogi, I. 82, 168, 16g, 18 5.           ~ledicine, I. 59, 63; II. 68.       See also
 }(uma-nari, I. 59, 23 2 , 367 ; II. 19, 2S6.         Physician.
Kuma-wani, I. 21g.                                 Medicine men, 1. 42.
Kuma-washi, I. 226.                                l\fediums, I. 79.
l,-umaso, I. 192, 196, 201, 219, 221. See          ~letals, I. 21, 29 I, 328.  See also Bronze,
    also Kuma and KOlna.                              Copper, Gold, Iron, Mint, Sih·er.
Kume,1. 80, 118, 127,133.178.                      Metal workers, I. 81 ; 11. 117, 376.
 ](uni no ~liyakko, or Kuni'tsuko (local           l\letamorphosis, I. 209, 210, 296, 361 ; II.
    governor), I. t 12. See also Miyakko.            155·
439                                          INDEX.

J\.Ietempsychosis, II. 149.                         l\funyong (King of Pekche), 1. 405.
~1ibu be, 1.280; II. 135.                           M ura (village), II. 18.
Michettl Hochi polhan, I. 241, 244.                 Muraji (title), I. 27.
~Iichi no Omi, 1. 117, 122, 133; II. 16,            l\lura-kuolo (s\\7ord), 1. 53.
   21.                                              t\1urder of an Enlperor, I. 334; II. 119·
l\Iidzuchi (water-snake or ,vater-god), I.          l\lure (Corean word for 1110untain), II. 54,
   299·                                                153·
Midzuha nOlne, 1.21, 122.                           Muretsu Tenno, 1. 399-407.
l\fidl.uha \vake (Prince and Emperor), I.           l\luro, 1. 71, 85, 123, 134, 201, 297, 37 6 ,
   305, 3 10.                                          379 j II. 375, 380, 4 26 .
~Iikage, II. 385.                                   Music, I. 326; II. 30, 72 , 144, 3 2 4, 350,
Miko, I. 79.                                           359, 371, 376, 406. See Flute, I~oto.
I\iikoto, I. 3.                                     Musubu no Kami, I. 5.
Mikoto-mochi, II. 116, 131.                         Mute (Corean Prince), I. 405.
Milky'Vay, I. 23, 39, 4 2•                          Myong (King of Pekche), II. 15, 66, 74.
~Iill, II. 140, 294.                                ~1ythology, Books 1. and II.
l\Iillet, I. 33.
~Iimaki irihiko iniye, I. 150.
Mimana, I. 167. See Imna.                           NA (nalne). See Names.
2\1imatsu hiko kayeshine, I. 144.                   Nagare-kanjo, II. 151.
Mimuma, I. 336.                                     Naga-sune-hiko, I. 113, 126, 12 7.
Mint, II. 414.                                      Naijin, II. 197.
Miroku, inlage of, II. 101, 127.                    Nails, superstitions regarding, I. 50.
Mirror, 1. 20, 43.47, 49, 76, 83, 168, 185,         Nakatomi, I. 42, 45, 48, 79.
    193, 25 1 , 34 1 ; 11. 3,33.                    Nakatsu (Prince), I. 301.
Misaheun, I. 242.                                   Nanla (Corean official rank), II. 55, 79,
Misaki (spur of bill or promontory), I.               etc.
  177·                                              Names (proper), I. 27, 175, 190 , 204,255.
~1isasagi (Imperial tomb), 1. 135, 139,21 I,          3 16, 393; II. 18 5, 223. 224, 225, 226,
  21 7, 23 6 , 297, 29 8 , 3 2 7, 357, 389) 390 i     354, 393· See also Title.
   II. 35, 143, 147, 156, 178, 235, 34 1 ,          Naniha (city of Ohosaka), I. 113.
    389,4°4.                                        Naniha (person), II. 92, et seqq.
 I\1itama-furishiki, II. 373.                       Nara Museum, II. 128.
Mitegura, II. 147.                                  Nari~kabura (sounding arrow), 1. 87; II.
Mitsugi (tribute), II. 23.                            277·
Miyake (granary), I. 178; II. 8, 13, 17,            Nashiro, I. 314, 322, 375, 406 ; II. 4,
    27, 28, 3 2 , 60, 78, 79, 136•                     13, 29, 3 1, 3 2 , 2 °4, 2 1 7. See Be,
Miyakko (local governor), I. 51, 133,215,             Koshiro.
    etc.                                            Nengo (year-period), II. 198, 236.
l\Iohitori. I. 134.                                 Ne no }(uni, I. 20. See Y·omi.
:i\lomari Cheulchi, I. 24(, 244.                    Ne no Omi, I. 33 1, 363.
1\1:ononobe, I. 128, 184.                           N ether land, I. 20, 32, 5I. See Y'omi.
Mononobe no Ohomuraji, II. 90, 112.                 Nigi~haya.hi no Mikoto, 1. 111,128; II.
~lonstrosities, I. 298; II. 147, 296, 300,            4 2 7.
  368 •                                             Nihabi (courtyard-fire), I. 44.
1\loon-god, I. 18-20, 28, 32 , 391.                 Nihi-nanle (fe::ttival of first-fruits), r. 86,
Moriya no Ohomuraji, II. go, 112.                      122,292 , 375, 379; II. 109, 1 69, 177·
Mortar, I. 189.                                       See Oho-nihe, Ahimbe.
1\lotoori, Preface, Introd. xix.                    Nihon. See Nippon.
Mounds, sepulchral, I. 72; II. 17. See              Ninken Tenno. I. 393-398.
   also IIaka, Misasagi, Tomb.                      Nintoku Tenno, 1. 272-300.
1\Iountain-goat. See Kama-shishi,                   Nippon, I. I, 13, 268, 345 ; II. 7, 12,42 ,
Mountain-god,!. 22.                                    137, 139, 149.3°3.
l\lourning, 1. 277 ; II. 232. See Funeral           No (genitive particle), frequent in proper
   ceremonies.                                        names.
1\lujina (animal like badger), I. 184.1             No dance, origin of, I. 79.
l\lulberry (paper), I. 49; (silk), I. 347,          Nomi no Sukune, 1. 175. 181.
   366 .                                            N orito (Shinto rituals). Illtrod. xii. xh-. ; I.
~lules, II. 344.                                      8o; II. 333.
1\1umayado      (Prince).     See   Shotoku         N uhoko or jewel-spear, I. I I.
   Daishi.                                          Nunakura futo-damashiki, II. 90.
Mumako no Sukune, II. 90, 101-103, I06~             Nuns, 11.96, 101, 103, 104, 113, 118, 135,
   112, 119. See Soga.                                etc.
Munchu (](ing of Pekche), I. 3li7.                  Nuptial hut, I. 12, 4 1, 54, 400.
                                             INDEX.                                      439
Nuribe. See Lacquer.                              Ordeal by boiling water, I. 258, 316; II.
Nyai pearl, I. 209.                                 22.
                                                  Original commentary, Introd. xxi. ; II. 41.
OATH, I. 35; II.. 82, 97, 197·                    Osak~ Oho-nakatsu hime, 1. 3 [3, 328.
Obito (title), 1. 43.                             Oshi ho mimi no :\Iikoto. I. 83.
Occultation of stars, I!. 1 69, 174, 353·         Oshikuma, Prince, I. 236, et seqq.
Offering.; to Gods, I. 44, 45, 47, 178 , 209,     Oshikuni oshi-take kannhi, II. $.
   227; II. 147, etc. See Gohei, Mite-
   gura, Nihi-nanle.                              PAGODA, II. 102, 114, 122, 169.
Ohine, 1. 278.                                    Painting and painters, I. 350; I I. 127,
Oho (great), passhll.                               133, 140, 144, 18 7, 244, 26 5, 336 .
Oho-harahe, II. 221, 35 2 , 378.            See   Pak Chesyang, I. 242.
   Harahe, Purgation.                             Panku. I. 28.
Oho-hatsuse \Vaka· take. I. 3 2 9, 333.           Panphi, part of eorea, II. 9, II, 13, etc.
Oho-hirume no Mikoto, 1. 110.                     Paper, II. 140.
Oho-hirume no muchi, I. 18.                       Paper-ululberry fibre, I. 44.
Oho-imi Deity, II. 328, etc.                      Parrots, II. 230, 251.
Ohoke (Emperor), I. 377·                          Parturition house, I. 73, 94, 103, 27i, 320 •
Oho-kunle, I. 116, 133.                           Peach, nlugical properties of, 1. 30.
()ho-kuni-dama, worship of, 1. 151.               Peacock, I. 230.
Oho-kusaka (Prince), I. 331.                      Pearl, II. 27, 34. See K yoi.
Oho-maye no Sukune, 1. 328.                       Pekche, l-(ingdom of Corea, I. 231, 232,
Obo-mono-nushi no ]~ami, I. 81, 15 2, 154,          248 , 249, 250. 257. 261, 263.349, and
   158.                                             frequently during the remainder of the
Oho-muraji. 1. 337, etc.                            work. l)ownfall of }>ekche, II. 269, et
Oho-namuji no Kan1i, 1. 54, 59, 68, 80 ;            seqq.
   II. 77.                                        Pekche record, I. 248, 252, etc.
Oho-nihe, Introd. xv. ; 1. 86: II. 32 4, 334,     Pepper Court, I I. 28.
   404. See Nihi-name.                            Pestilence, 1. 151 ; II. 67, 102, 104.
Oho-omi, I. 334, 337 ; II. 108, etc.              Pestle and mortar, I. J 89.
Oho-saka, 1. 113.                                 Petroleunl, II. 289.
Oho-sazaki, I. 255, 259, 27 1, 272. See           Phallic worship, I. I I, 77, 139.
   Nintoku.                                       Phasa, ](in~ of Silla, I. 231.
Oho-sora. ~ee Sora.                               Pheasant, 1. 65, 73, 90.
Oho-tarashi-hiko-oshiro wake. See Keiko.          Pheasant, white, an omen, II. 124.
Oho-tomo. 1. 86, 116, 133, etc.                   Phung-chhang-(Pekchc Prince), II. 165, 184.
Oho.. tsu (Prince), II. 383.                      Physicians, I. 315 j II. 72, 295. See
Oho-usu (Prince), I. 188, 202.                       ::\fedicine.
Oho-yama-mori (Prince), 1. 270, 274.              Picnics, 1. 388, 389, etc.
Oho-yarnato-hiko-suki tonlO. See I toku.          J)iebald colt of Heaven, I. 40, 45.
Oho • yamato • neko - hiko - futo - ni. See       Pit-dwellers, 1. 7 I. See ~luro.
   KareL                                          Pleiades, 1. 69.
()ho-yamato-neko-hiko kuni kuru. See              Polar bear. See Bear.
   Kogen.                                         Polygamy. I. 118, 323.
()ho-yashima (Great-eight-island-country),        Portents, II. 148, 155, 180, 183, 186, 187,
   I. 14, 16; II. 238.                               190. See Omens.
Ohoye, I. 278.                                    Posthumous honours, 11. 323, and {re-
Ojin Tenno, I. 254-271; II. 9.                       quently after this.
()kinle (old woman), I. 386,38 7. 391.            Posting, I I. 206, 2°7.
Okinaga tarashi.hi hiro-nuka. See Jomei.          Potters and pottery, I. 121, 155, 170, 350,
Okinaga tarashi-hime, 1. 218, 224; II. 8.,           365; 11. I 17. See Clay-\\·nrkers,
   59·                                               Hanishi.
Old man of the sea, I. 88, 92.                    }>resents offered on branches, I. 193, 220.
Omens, 1. 227, 228, 238, 277, 320; II. 2,         Priest, En1peror acting as, I. 225.
   4, 226, 237, 239, 245, 256, 259, 26 3,         Primogeniture, 1. 110, 140, 273, 384; II.
   266, 26 9, 270, 27 6 , 277, 293, 33 1 359,
                                        't           24 2 •
   etc.                                   ·       Prince, I. 14 2 , 149.
Omi (Minister or high official, also title of     Punam, II. 48.
   nobility), I. 36, et paSSilll. See Oho-onli.   Punishments, II. 234, et passil/l.
Omohi.kane no Kami, I. 42, 46.                    Purgation, or purification, ceremony (Jf, 1.
()lIi-yarahi, cerenlony of, II. 389.                 26, 31,48,49,5°, 224, 30 8; II. 96, 221.
()nogoro-jima, I. 12.                                See Oho-harahe, IIarahe.
()range-trce, 1. 186.                             Purity, ritual, 1.41.
()rdeal by fire, I. 73, 85, 89.                   Puyo, country of, II. 18.
 44°                                      INDEX.

 QUELPAERT.       See Tanlna.                    Serpents, I. 52, 296, 299, 347.
 Quiver, I. 34.                                  Serpent-worship, I. 158, 208, 299, 347.
                                                   See Midzuchi.
RAIN of ashes) II. 346, 369.                     Seta, hattIe of, II. 314.
Rain, prayers for, II. 174· 175, etc.            Seven stars, 11. 366.
Raitsui (stone weapons), 1. 12.                  Shaka, II. 65.
Rank, official, II. 1 2 7, 225, 228, 231, 368•   Shamon, II. 197. 241, etc.
  See Cap-rank.                                  Shari. See Relics.
Recorders, I. 307, 357.                          Sheep, II. 124, 1~8.
Red bird, II. 347, 351.                          Shibi no Omi, I. 400, et seqq.
Red crow, IT 337, 407, 409. See \·ata-           Shields, I. 80, ISS, 282; II. 395.
  garasu.                                        Shiguma, II. 257. See Bear.
Red tortoise, I r. 352.                          Shihi-netsu-hiko, I. 1 I I, 120, 121, 126.
Regalia, 1. 76, 83, 3°7; II. 3. 33·              Shiho-tsu no oji, 1. 92, 110.
Relics (Buddhist), II. 102, 117, 121.            Shiki (rebel), I. 125.
Religion.    See Buddhism, Mythology,            ~hiki    (Colnmentary on "Nihongi "),
  Shinto.                                          Introd. xiii. xix.
Retreat (religious), II. 360, 369, 398.          Shiki tsu hiko tami demi. See Annei.
Rice, creation of, I. 33.                        Shikome (ugly woman of Vorni), 1. 25.
Rice-castle. See Inaki.                          Shinjosai (festival), 1. 86.
Richiu Tenno, 1. 3°1.                            Sbinto (religion), Introd. xii. xxiv.; I.
Riddle, I. 396. ~ee Conundrull1.                   4 1, 43; II. 106, 195, 293. See Mytho·
Right and left, precedence of, 1. 16; 1 J.         lo~y. Sun-goddess, Nakatomi, Imbe,
  15·                                              Offerings, 'Vind-god, etc.
H.isshi (Buddhist rank), II. 359, 416, etc.      Shinto priests, 1. 56. See Hafuri.
River-god, I 22, 281, 299; II. 174. See          Shinto shrines, I. 58; II. 76.
  Midzuchi, Serpent-worship.                     Shinra. See Silla.
I~ock·cave of IIeaven, I. 41-5°.                 Shipping tax, II. 69.
                                                 Ships, I. 58, J61, 256, 268, etc.
SA (honorific prefix), I. 3.                     Shiraga take-hiro·kuni-oshi-\vaka-Yaluato.
Sachihiko (envoy to Corea), I. 252, etc.           neko, 1. 373.
Sacred jars, I. 122, 130, 157.                   Shiratori no Misasagi, I. 21 I.
Sacrifices, I. 220, 228, 281 ; II. 174. See      Shiri-kume-naha, 1. 45.
   Offerings.                                    Shiro, a land measure,. II. I 15, 205) 394.
~acrifices, human, I. 178, 181.                  Shitenno, II 114, 482.
Sadaijin, II. 196, 294.                          Shitenoji. II. I 15, 12 3, IS0.
Saheki Be, I. 212.                               Shogun, I. 156.
Sahohiko, 1. 172.                                Shoki, I. I.
Saimei l"enno, II. 248-273-                      Shotoku Daishi, lntrod. xiv j II. 95, 107,
Saka (an acclivity), frequent in names of          114, 122, 133, 144, 148, 431.
   places.                                       Shrines, I. 132 ; tI. 318.
Sakahe, Miwa no Kitni, II. 107, et seqq.         Shiicho (year-period), II. 373, 379.
Sakaki (sacred tree), I. 43, 47, 81, 21 9.       Shiikai (or Shuge) edition of" Nihongi,"
Sake (rice-beer), I. 52, 56, 154, 244, 245,        Introd. xx.
  264; II. 166.                                  Shuttle, 1. 41.
Sakitsuya, 1. 348.                               Signet (Imperial), I. 314; 11. 3. See
Sakyamuni. See Shaka.                              Regalia.
Salt-pans, I. 220, 268.                          Silk, I. 166, et passi11' in Vol. II.
Saniha, I. 225.                                  Silkworm, 1. 21, 33, 347; II. 5.             See
Sarcophagus, I. 137 ; II. 285, 389.                 Mulberry.
Sarume, 1. 44, 76, 79.                           Silla (l<.ingdom of Corea), I. 57, 166,221,
Saruta-hiko, I. 77.                                 230, 23 1 , 234, 249, 257, 269, 2$4, 295,
Scribes. See Recorders, Fumibito.                   3 15, 32 6, 349, 354; II. IS, 18, 35, 3&'
Sea-gods, I. 22, 93, 95, 106.                      and frequent] y after this.
Sea monster, I. 61, 95, 98, 102.                 Silver, II. J7 2 , 3 2 5, 360, 38 7, 4 0 3, 404t
Seamstresses imported, I. 261, 269, 271,           4°5·
  36 3.                                          Slaves, I. 209,356 ; II. 48, 64, 73, 74,
Seimu Tenno, 1. 214-216.                           82, 93. 100, 113, f 15, 182, 202, 220,
Seinei TenllO, I. 373-377.                         221, 402.
Senkwa Tenno, II. 33-35.                         Slnith-god, I. 8I, 139.
Sepulchral mounds, I. 72; II. 17. See            Snake-worship. See Serpent-worship-
  l\lisasagi, Haka, Tomb.                        Sodzu. II. 153, 32 5, 359, 377, 37 8.
Serfs,!. 388; II. 29, 30, 79, 87, 94. 178,       Saga family. II. 148, 1M9.
  206, 217, 3 2 7, 37 I, 431.                    Soga no Oho-omi, II. 7t>,87.
                                          INDEX.                                          44 1
Soga no Mumako, II. 90-119.                      Tachibana no Toyohi. See '·Oll1ei Tenno.
So In-ko, II. 136.                               Tadzukai (office), II. 87.
Sojo, II. 153. 359. 377, 378.                    Tagishi nlimi, son of Jhnmu, I. 138.
Sonaka Cheulchi, I. 164, 166.                    Tai (fi~h), I. 93.
Sora (the void of Heaven), I. 4 83. 347.         Taikyoku, II. 191.
Sosa no wo (deity), I. 19, 28, 32 , 34-59.       Tajihi no :\1idzuha-wake. 1. 3to.
Soto..ori.hime, 1. 318.                          ~rajinla :\lori (lnission to fetch the ora.nge-
Soul, 1. 263.                                       tree), I. 186.
South, Emperor faces, on official occasions,     Takakuraji. I. 115.
  II. 3.                                         Takama no hara (plain of High Heayell), I.
Spear, 1.44, 47, 155.                               16, 33,83, 133·
Spelling, Introd. xxi.                           Takama no barn. l1iro-nu no hitlle. See
Spider, superstition regarding, I. 320.             lito.
Spittle, I. 31, 48, 106.                         Taka mi musubi (god), I. 5, 64, 81, 86,90,
S'ramana, II. 197.                                 110, 122, 392.
S'ramanera. II. 348.                             Takayasu, castle of, II. 290, etc.
Star-god. See Kagase-wo.                         Take (brave), I. 64, frequent in nantes.
Stone implements, I. 189.                        Takechi (Prince), II. 309, et seqq.
Stone weapons, I. 87, 123. 169; II. 308.         Takechi no Sukune (statesman), 1. 200,
Stone worship, I. I, 168, 183. See Idzushi.        211, 215, 223, 23 8, 245, 248, 257, 294,
Storehouse, I. 184. See Miyake, Inaki.             317 ; II. 8.
Suguri. See Sukuri.                              Take ha dzuchi (god), 1. 70.
Suguroku (backgammon), II. 395.                  Take-hani-yasn-hlko (rebel), 1. 156, et
Suicide. Sec Junshi.                               seqq.
Suiko Tenno, II. 121- 156.                       Take-mika-dzuchi (deity), 1. 68, I IS.
Suinin Tenno, I. 165-187.                        Take-wo-hiro-kuni oshi-tate.       See Sen-
Suizei Tenno, I. 138-141.                          k,va.
Sujin Tenno, I. 150, 164.                        Taku-hata, I. 341.
Sujun Tenno. II. 112.. 120.                      Talsnl (Coreau title), II. 98, 283.
Sukuna-hikona (gcd), I. 59-6 3, 244.             Tama (jewel, spirit), frequent in names.
Sukune (title), I. 142, 236.                     Tatna-boko (je\\'el-spear of Heaven), I.
Sukuri (title), I. 34l ; II. 74.                    II.
Sumera !\1ikoto, I. 109.                         Tama-yori..hime, 1. 94, 1°4, 108.
Sumeru or Sumi, Mount, II. 144,25 1,259,         Tamna, II. 6,271, 284, 286, 290, 323, etc.
  26 5.                                          Tan, land nleasure, II. 208; cloth measure,
Sumptuary Laws, II. 343, 350.                      II. 209.
Sun and moon, sex o!, 1. 28.                     Tanegashima (island), II. 336, 344, 352,
Sunai (junior), II. 250.                                356 , 359, 4 I 8.
Sun-crow, 1. 116. See Yatagarasu.                    Tanka (poetry), 1. 91, etc.
Sun-goddess, I. 18, 20, 28, 32 , 33, 41-49,          Tankun, legend of, II. 77-
  73, 115, 151, 17 6 ,39 2 ; II. 95, 10 7, 30 7.     Tanners, 1. 397.
Sun.tnirror, 1. 82, 168, 169. See :.\lirror.         Tarashi·naka-tsu hiko. See Chiuai.
Superstitions, 1. 325- See Conlb, Spider,            Targets, I. 282.
  Child-birth, Spittle, Caterpillar, Fetish,         Tasuke (shoulder straps or braces), I. 44.
  Omens, Diyination, Bed, (~arlic, Iilcan-           ~ratami (mats), I. 325.
  tations, Magic, Nails, Peach, Ordeal,              Tatemono, 1. 181.
  Ited animals, \Vhite aninlals.                     'rattooing, I. 200, 305.
Surnames, origin of, I. 27, 2°4, 316. See            Taxation, 1. 160, 365; II. 68, 208, 209,
  Names, Titles.                                        225, etc.
Snsa no woo See Sosa no WOe                          Temmu 'fenno, II. 3°1-381.
Sushen (Manchus), II. 58, 257, 260, 263,             Temples (Buddhist), II. 67, 101, I lIt 341,
  26 5, 335. 420.                                       346, etc.
Sutras, Il~. 65,96 , 133, 135, 170, 175, 240,        Temples of the Earth and Grain, Introd.
  24 1 , 26 3, 26 5, 335, 346 , 35 2 , 37 1 , 37 2 ,    xvi.; 1.171, etc.
  376, 378, 379, 403, 408, 4 13, 4 16, 4 21 ,        Tenchi Tenno, 1I. 274-300.
  422. See also Issaikio.                            Tendoku (mode of reading Sutras), II.
Swan, I. 174.                                           175·
Sword, I. 35, 53, 87, 9 2 , I 15, 123, 162, : Tengu (celestial do~), II. 167-
  183, 360 ; II. 3, etc.                             Tenno (Emperor), I. 109, 234.
Syoko (King of Pekchel, I. 247,251.                  Tennoji, tenlple of, II. I 15, 296.
Syong-myong (King of Pekche), 11.42 , 43,            Tenshodaijin. See Sun-goddess.
  66.                                                Tera (temple), II. 122, 123.
                                                     Thang (China), II 136, 145, ISO, 16S,
TACHIRANA, I. 186.                                      166, 242, 245, 260, 280, 298, 393. e~c.
44 2                                      INDEX.

Three Buddhist garments, II. 203. See            Uda~jin, II. 196, 294·
  Kesa.                                          Uji (noble House), I. 27, 316; II. 143,.
Three-legged crow, II. 237. See Vatn-              190, etc.
  garasu.                                        IT ji no waka-iratsuko, I. 171, 276.
Three-legged ~farrow, II. 359·                   Ukemochi no KaroL See Food-goddess.
Three preciou-; things, II. 104, 109, 123.       Ukeshi, I. J 17, 120.
    129. 149, 337, 377·                          Ullambana, II. 230, 251, 26j.
Thunder-god, 1. 29, 1 15; II. 147. See           1.1 mashi-ashi· kabi, L 4.
   Take-lnika-dzuchi.                            Umbilical cord, superstition regarding, I.
Tidal \yave, lIe 366.                              85·
r"figer stories, II. 60, 190.                    Uneme (palace waiting-wolllen), I. 292,
'riles, II. 164.                                   3°4,3 26 .345 ; II. 3 1 , 209·
Titles, I. 27, 175, 316; II. 201, 225 228,       Unicorn, II. 23q.
   361 , 364.                                    lJ nseen trade, I I. 264.
Tohe or tobe, I. 114, 129.                       U pasaka, II. 372.
Tok, I. 354.                                     Upashaya_ II. 377·
Tok, II. 55.                                     U rahe (diviners), II. 102.
l'okaido, I. 155.                                U ra;;hima, legend of, I. 368.
Tokibe (magIstrates), II. 396.                   Uro, 1. 235.
Tokni, II. 100.                                  U rosohorichiu, I. 234.
Tokoya or 10kuyo no kuni (Eternal Land),         U rushi. ~ee Lacquer.
   1. 42, 60, 114, 176, 186, 368; II 188,        U su (lnill), I. 189.
   42 5.                                         Utagaki (poetical tournament), I. 400.
Tonlbs, I. 159, 180, 21 3; II. 17, 145, 162,     Uzu (ornament), II. 128. See Hair
   178, 193, 21 7, 242 , 292 • See l\lisasagi.      ornaments.
Torno, 1. 254.                                   Uzltme no l\fikoto, I. 44, 50, 77.
TOll1oye, I. 34.
Toneri (charrtberlain), I. 319,359,395, etc.     VENUS (planet). I. 69.
'foneri (Prince), Introd. xiii.                  Vimokcha, II. 60.
Tortoise-shell (used in divination), I. ) 52.    Vinaya. II. 96.
Toyo (rich, abundant); frequent in proper        Void of Heaven. See Sora.
   names.
Toyo (province of Kiushiu), II. IS.              'VA (name for Japan), I. 242, ~45; II. 72,
Toyo-ata-tsu hime, I. 91.                          137, 303. etc.
1'oyoki no Mikoto. I. 16I.                       'Vag tail , I. 17.
Toyo-kumu-nu (deity), I. 4.                      Waka (young), frequent in proper names.
Toyo-kuni nushi (deity), I. 4.                   Waka-hiru-nle no Mikoto. 1.45, 237.
Toyo-mike-kashikiya. See Suiko.                  Waka~yalnato-neko-hiko-oho.hibi, I. 148.
Toyo· talna-hime, 1. 93-108.                     \Vaka-tarashi-hiko, I. 214.
Treasury, I. 30 9, 373; II. 37.                  'Vake (Pri~lce), I. 190, (92 ; II. 206.
Trt e-god, I. 22.                                Wangin or Wani {Corean scholar), Introd.
Trees created, I. 58.                              xi.; I. 262, 309.
Tribute to Japan from Corea, I. 231, 296,        Wani (sea.monster), 1. 61, 156, 262.
   It passi1ll.                                  War-god. See Hachiman.
Tribute from Japan to China, I. 245·             Watarishima (Vezo), II. 252, 264.
Tripitaka, II. 322. See Issaikio.                Watchword, 11.313.
Triratna, II. 104. See Three precious            'Vater deity, I. 22, 299. See ~Iidzuha·
   things.                                         nome.
T'sin (Chinese dynasty), II. 38.                 Water-level, II. 296.
Tsu (archaic genitive particle), frequent in     Water-snake,1. 299. See Serpent-worship.
   proper names.                                 Weavers, Corean, I. 26 5 270.
Tsu,- hi (in naines of deities), I. 3, 4.        Weaver-god, 1. 70.
T~uchigumo (pit-dwellers), I. 129, 194,          \Veaving, I. 41,45,90, 183, 26 5, 29 1, 350,
   195. 198.                                       363, ttc.
Tsuchi-ningio, 1. lSI.                           "reaving nlaiden (a star), I. 75.
Tsuki-yomi no Mikoto. See Moon-god.              Wet-nur~es, I. 104.
T~ukushi, I. 13. 1 0 9, 112, 192, etc.           Wheat, 1. 33.
Tsumori no Muraji, II. 49.                       White animals (favourable omens),!. 297;
Tukhara, in India. II. 246, 259, 266.              II. 124, 174. 23 6, 237, 239, 25 2 , 286,
Tunlulus. See Tomb, 1\1isasagi, Sepul-              322 , 326 , 35 2, 394, 410, 4 16.
   chral mound.                                  'Vind~deities, I. 22, 230; II. 328, etc.
TYOllChi (Corean Prince), I. 263.                Witchcraft. I. 60; II. 110, 18 7, 190.
                                                   See Magic, Incantation.
l]BUYA.     See Parturition house.               "Yo~asatsuma \\Takugo no Sukune, I. 312.
                                        INDEX.                                        443
\Vobashira, 1. II, 24.                         Yashiro (shrine), I. 82.
\Yohono. See Keidai Tenno.                     \:"'asumaro, lntrod. xiii. xi,-.
\Voke. See Kenzo Tenno.                        Yata, Princess, I. 285.
Wokera (drug), II. 37 2 , 373.                 Yatagarasu, I. 44, 52, 1 J 5, 12 5, 134 j II.
'Yoh-es, II. 36.                                  237·
Women as rulers. I. 194; position of, I.       Yatakagami, 1. 43. See i\lin"or.
  330 ,400 .                                   Yatsu, I. 52.
\Voollen carpets, I I. 73.                     Yebisu. See Yemishi.
Wosada nunakura futodaUlashiki, II. 38.        Yeluishi or Ainos, I. 109, 124, 159, 200,
Wo·usu, 1. 188. See Yamato-dake.                   202, 203, 206, 212, 21 4. 29 6, 37]; II.
Wrestling, I. 173.                                 38, 9 6, 168, 176, 20g, 249, 25 2, 254,
~Triting, Introd. xi. x,·ii.; I. 262.              259.260,262,289,354,355,389.
\Vu (in China). 1. 265, 26g, 27 1, 296, 347,   Yenlishi (Prime l\Iinister). It 157~ IiI,
   358, 363. See Go, I'-ure.                     17 8 . 181, 193, 23 1•
                                               Y'ellow sprin~s, 1. 24; II. 45, 233.
                                               \"eta. See Eta.
Y AHATA, 1. 2]1.                               Yin and \P ang, I. I ; II. 223, 295.
Yakabe (Prince), II. 112.                      Yochhyang (Corean Prince), II. 70, 75,
Yakll (island), II. 146, J47, 164.               77-
Yakushi (Buddhist deity), II. 348, 376,        \;"ogi, II. 96.
  393·                                         Yomei Tenno, II. 106-111.
Valua (nlountain), frequent in nalnes.         V'onli or Hades, 1. 24, 26, 29, ]1, 50,
Varna (Indian God), I. 24.                         6g.
'famashiro (Prince), II. 156, 182.             Y'oshino, I. 119.
Yamato (province), 1. I, (3, 109, etc.         \r oshino, Palace of, frequently in Book
Yamato-dake (Prince),!. 189, 200, et seqq.       xxx.
Vamato-neko, I, 146; II. 210.                  'Vorodzu, prowess of, II. 115.
Yamato no Oho-kuni-dama, I. 151.               Yoshino (Prince), II. 197,204.
Vamato-tarashi-hiko-kuni-oshi-bito, I. 145-    Yu-be, II. 21.
Yanasa, II. 53.                                Yufu (tree fibre \, I. 81.
Yasaka genl, 1. 34, 35, 38, 43, 49, 76, 81,    Yuniha, 1.41, 83, 86.
  I8~.                                         Yi:iriaku Tenno, 1. 333-372.
